”

30133m



“Indeed? Then your father ought to have met with you on the road, for
it is exactly the same route which he himself took, and that is how we
have been able to trace your journey to this place.”

“But,” said Andrea, “if my father had met me, I doubt if he would have
recognized me; I must be somewhat altered since he last saw me.”

“Oh, the voice of nature,” said Monte Cristo.

“True,” interrupted the young man, “I had not looked upon it in that
light.”

“Now,” replied Monte Cristo “there is only one source of uneasiness
left in your father’s mind, which is this—he is anxious to know how you
have been employed during your long absence from him, how you have been
treated by your persecutors, and if they have conducted themselves
towards you with all the deference due to your rank. Finally, he is
anxious to see if you have been fortunate enough to escape the bad
moral influence to which you have been exposed, and which is infinitely
more to be dreaded than any physical suffering; he wishes to discover
if the fine abilities with which nature had endowed you have been
weakened by want of culture; and, in short, whether you consider
yourself capable of resuming and retaining in the world the high
position to which your rank entitles you.”

“Sir!” exclaimed the young man, quite astounded, “I hope no false
report——”

“As for myself, I first heard you spoken of by my friend Wilmore, the
philanthropist. I believe he found you in some unpleasant position, but
do not know of what nature, for I did not ask, not being inquisitive.
Your misfortunes engaged his sympathies, so you see you must have been
interesting. He told me that he was anxious to restore you to the
position which you had lost, and that he would seek your father until
he found him. He did seek, and has found him, apparently, since he is
here now; and, finally, my friend apprised me of your coming, and gave
me a few other instructions relative to your future fortune. I am quite
aware that my friend Wilmore is peculiar, but he is sincere, and as
rich as a gold mine, consequently, he may indulge his eccentricities
without any fear of their ruining him, and I have promised to adhere to
his instructions. Now, sir, pray do not be offended at the question I
am about to put to you, as it comes in the way of my duty as your
patron. I would wish to know if the misfortunes which have happened to
you—misfortunes entirely beyond your control, and which in no degree
diminish my regard for you—I would wish to know if they have not, in
some measure, contributed to render you a stranger to the world in
which your fortune and your name entitle you to make a conspicuous
figure?”

“Sir,” returned the young man, with a reassurance of manner, “make your
mind easy on this score. Those who took me from my father, and who
always intended, sooner or later, to sell me again to my original
proprietor, as they have now done, calculated that, in order to make
the most of their bargain, it would be politic to leave me in
possession of all my personal and hereditary worth, and even to
increase the value, if possible. I have, therefore, received a very
good education, and have been treated by these kidnappers very much as
the slaves were treated in Asia Minor, whose masters made them
grammarians, doctors, and philosophers, in order that they might fetch
a higher price in the Roman market.”

Monte Cristo smiled with satisfaction; it appeared as if he had not
expected so much from M. Andrea Cavalcanti.

“Besides,” continued the young man, “if there did appear some defect in
education, or offence against the established forms of etiquette, I
suppose it would be excused, in consideration of the misfortunes which
accompanied my birth, and followed me through my youth.”

“Well,” said Monte Cristo in an indifferent tone, “you will do as you
please, count, for you are the master of your own actions, and are the
person most concerned in the matter, but if I were you, I would not
divulge a word of these adventures. Your history is quite a romance,
and the world, which delights in romances in yellow covers, strangely
mistrusts those which are bound in living parchment, even though they
be gilded like yourself. This is the kind of difficulty which I wished
to represent to you, my dear count. You would hardly have recited your
touching history before it would go forth to the world, and be deemed
unlikely and unnatural. You would be no longer a lost child found, but
you would be looked upon as an upstart, who had sprung up like a
mushroom in the night. You might excite a little curiosity, but it is
not everyone who likes to be made the centre of observation and the
subject of unpleasant remark.”

“I agree with you, monsieur,” said the young man, turning pale, and, in
spite of himself, trembling beneath the scrutinizing look of his
companion, “such consequences would be extremely unpleasant.”

“Nevertheless, you must not exaggerate the evil,” said Monte Cristo,
“for by endeavoring to avoid one fault you will fall into another. You
must resolve upon one simple and single line of conduct, and for a man
of your intelligence, this plan is as easy as it is necessary; you must
form honorable friendships, and by that means counteract the prejudice
which may attach to the obscurity of your former life.”

Andrea visibly changed countenance.

“I would offer myself as your surety and friendly adviser,” said Monte
Cristo, “did I not possess a moral distrust of my best friends, and a
sort of inclination to lead others to doubt them too; therefore, in
departing from this rule, I should (as the actors say) be playing a
part quite out of my line, and should, therefore, run the risk of being
hissed, which would be an act of folly.”

“However, your excellency,” said Andrea, “in consideration of Lord
Wilmore, by whom I was recommended to you——”

“Yes, certainly,” interrupted Monte Cristo; “but Lord Wilmore did not
omit to inform me, my dear M. Andrea, that the season of your youth was
rather a stormy one. Ah,” said the count, watching Andrea’s
countenance, “I do not demand any confession from you; it is precisely
to avoid that necessity that your father was sent for from Lucca. You
shall soon see him. He is a little stiff and pompous in his manner, and
he is disfigured by his uniform; but when it becomes known that he has
been for eighteen years in the Austrian service, all that will be
pardoned. We are not generally very severe with the Austrians. In
short, you will find your father a very presentable person, I assure
you.”

“Ah, sir, you have given me confidence; it is so long since we were
separated, that I have not the least remembrance of him, and, besides,
you know that in the eyes of the world a large fortune covers all
defects.”

“He is a millionaire—his income is 500,000 francs.”

“Then,” said the young man, with anxiety, “I shall be sure to be placed
in an agreeable position.”

“One of the most agreeable possible, my dear sir; he will allow you an
income of 50,000 livres per annum during the whole time of your stay in
Paris.”

“Then in that case I shall always choose to remain there.”

“You cannot control circumstances, my dear sir; ‘man proposes, and God
disposes.’” Andrea sighed.

“But,” said he, “so long as I do remain in Paris, and nothing forces me
to quit it, do you mean to tell me that I may rely on receiving the sum
you just now mentioned to me?”

“You may.”

“Shall I receive it from my father?” asked Andrea, with some
uneasiness.

“Yes, you will receive it from your father personally, but Lord Wilmore
will be the security for the money. He has, at the request of your
father, opened an account of 5,000 francs a month at M. Danglars’,
which is one of the safest banks in Paris.”

“And does my father mean to remain long in Paris?” asked Andrea.

“Only a few days,” replied Monte Cristo. “His service does not allow
him to absent himself more than two or three weeks together.”

“Ah, my dear father!” exclaimed Andrea, evidently charmed with the idea
of his speedy departure.

“Therefore,” said Monte Cristo feigning to mistake his
meaning—“therefore I will not, for another instant, retard the pleasure
of your meeting. Are you prepared to embrace your worthy father?”

“I hope you do not doubt it.”

30137m



“Go, then, into the drawing-room, my young friend, where you will find
your father awaiting you.”

Andrea made a low bow to the count, and entered the adjoining room.
Monte Cristo watched him till he disappeared, and then touched a spring
in a panel made to look like a picture, which, in sliding partly from
the frame, discovered to view a small opening, so cleverly contrived
that it revealed all that was passing in the drawing-room now occupied
by Cavalcanti and Andrea. The young man closed the door behind him, and
advanced towards the major, who had risen when he heard steps
approaching him.

“Ah, my dear father!” said Andrea in a loud voice, in order that the
count might hear him in the next room, “is it really you?”

“How do you do, my dear son?” said the major gravely.

“After so many years of painful separation,” said Andrea, in the same
tone of voice, and glancing towards the door, “what a happiness it is
to meet again!”

“Indeed it is, after so long a separation.”

“Will you not embrace me, sir?” said Andrea.

30139m



“If you wish it, my son,” said the major; and the two men embraced each
other after the fashion of actors on the stage; that is to say, each
rested his head on the other’s shoulder.

“Then we are once more reunited?” said Andrea.

“Once more,” replied the major.

“Never more to be separated?”

“Why, as to that—I think, my dear son, you must be by this time so
accustomed to France as to look upon it almost as a second country.”

“The fact is,” said the young man, “that I should be exceedingly
grieved to leave it.