This is what had happened: Andrea had very cleverly managed to descend
two-thirds of the chimney, but then his foot slipped, and
notwithstanding his endeavors, he came into the room with more speed
and noise than he intended. It would have signified little had the room
been empty, but unfortunately it was occupied. Two ladies, sleeping in
one bed, were awakened by the noise, and fixing their eyes upon the
spot whence the sound proceeded, they saw a man. One of these ladies,
the fair one, uttered those terrible shrieks which resounded through
the house, while the other, rushing to the bell-rope, rang with all her
strength. Andrea, as we can see, was surrounded by misfortune.

“For pity’s sake,” he cried, pale and bewildered, without seeing whom
he was addressing,—“for pity’s sake do not call assistance! Save me!—I
will not harm you.”

“Andrea, the murderer!” cried one of the ladies.

“Eugénie! Mademoiselle Danglars!” exclaimed Andrea, stupefied.

“Help, help!” cried Mademoiselle d’Armilly, taking the bell from her
companion’s hand, and ringing it yet more violently.

“Save me, I am pursued!” said Andrea, clasping his hands. “For pity,
for mercy’s sake do not deliver me up!”

“It is too late, they are coming,” said Eugénie.

“Well, conceal me somewhere; you can say you were needlessly alarmed;
you can turn their suspicions and save my life!”

50053m



The two ladies, pressing closely to one another, and drawing the
bedclothes tightly around them, remained silent to this supplicating
voice, repugnance and fear taking possession of their minds.

“Well, be it so,” at length said Eugénie; “return by the same road you
came, and we will say nothing about you, unhappy wretch.”

“Here he is, here he is!” cried a voice from the landing; “here he is!
I see him!”

The brigadier had put his eye to the keyhole, and had discovered Andrea
in a posture of entreaty. A violent blow from the butt end of the
musket burst open the lock, two more forced out the bolts, and the
broken door fell in. Andrea ran to the other door, leading to the
gallery, ready to rush out; but he was stopped short, and he stood with
his body a little thrown back, pale, and with the useless knife in his
clenched hand.

“Fly, then!” cried Mademoiselle d’Armilly, whose pity returned as her
fears diminished; “fly!”

“Or kill yourself!” said Eugénie (in a tone which a Vestal in the
amphitheatre would have used, when urging the victorious gladiator to
finish his vanquished adversary). Andrea shuddered, and looked on the
young girl with an expression which proved how little he understood
such ferocious honor.

“Kill myself?” he cried, throwing down his knife; “why should I do so?”

“Why, you said,” answered Mademoiselle Danglars, “that you would be
condemned to die like the worst criminals.”

50055m



“Bah,” said Cavalcanti, crossing his arms, “one has friends.”

The brigadier advanced to him, sword in hand.

“Come, come,” said Andrea, “sheathe your sword, my fine fellow; there
is no occasion to make such a fuss, since I give myself up;” and he
held out his hands to be manacled.

The two girls looked with horror upon this shameful metamorphosis, the
man of the world shaking off his covering and appearing as a
galley-slave. Andrea turned towards them, and with an impertinent smile
asked, “Have you any message for your father, Mademoiselle Danglars,
for in all probability I shall return to Paris?”

Eugénie covered her face with her hands.

“Oh, oh!” said Andrea, “you need not be ashamed, even though you did
post after me. Was I not nearly your husband?”

50056m



And with this raillery Andrea went out, leaving the two girls a prey to
their own feelings of shame, and to the comments of the crowd. An hour
after they stepped into their calash, both dressed in feminine attire.
The gate of the hotel had been closed to screen them from sight, but
they were forced, when the door was open, to pass through a throng of
curious glances and whispering voices.

Eugénie closed her eyes; but though she could not see, she could hear,
and the sneers of the crowd reached her in the carriage.

“Oh, why is not the world a wilderness?” she exclaimed, throwing
herself into the arms of Mademoiselle d’Armilly, her eyes sparkling
with the same kind of rage which made Nero wish that the Roman world
had but one neck, that he might sever it at a single blow.

The next day they stopped at the Hôtel de Flandre, at Brussels. The
same evening Andrea was incarcerated in the Conciergerie.



 Chapter 99. The Law

We have seen how quietly Mademoiselle Danglars and Mademoiselle
d’Armilly accomplished their transformation and flight; the fact being
that everyone was too much occupied in his or her own affairs to think
of theirs.

We will leave the banker contemplating the enormous magnitude of his
debt before the phantom of bankruptcy, and follow the baroness, who
after being momentarily crushed under the weight of the blow which had
struck her, had gone to seek her usual adviser, Lucien Debray. The
baroness had looked forward to this marriage as a means of ridding her
of a guardianship which, over a girl of Eugénie’s character, could not
fail to be rather a troublesome undertaking; for in the tacit relations
which maintain the bond of family union, the mother, to maintain her
ascendancy over her daughter, must never fail to be a model of wisdom
and a type of perfection.

Now, Madame Danglars feared Eugénie’s sagacity and the influence of
Mademoiselle d’Armilly; she had frequently observed the contemptuous
expression with which her daughter looked upon Debray,—an expression
which seemed to imply that she understood all her mother’s amorous and
pecuniary relationships with the intimate secretary; moreover, she saw
that Eugénie detested Debray, not only because he was a source of
dissension and scandal under the paternal roof, but because she had at
once classed him in that catalogue of bipeds whom Plato endeavors to
withdraw from the appellation of men, and whom Diogenes designated as
animals upon two legs without feathers.

Unfortunately, in this world of ours, each person views things through
a certain medium, and so is prevented from seeing in the same light as
others, and Madame Danglars, therefore, very much regretted that the
marriage of Eugénie had not taken place, not only because the match was
good, and likely to insure the happiness of her child, but because it
would also set her at liberty. She ran therefore to Debray, who, after
having, like the rest of Paris, witnessed the contract scene and the
scandal attending it, had retired in haste to his club, where he was
chatting with some friends upon the events which served as a subject of
conversation for three-fourths of that city known as the capital of the
world.

At the precise time when Madame Danglars, dressed in black and
concealed in a long veil, was ascending the stairs leading to Debray’s
apartments, notwithstanding the assurances of the concierge that the
young man was not at home, Debray was occupied in repelling the
insinuations of a friend, who tried to persuade him that after the
terrible scene which had just taken place he ought, as a friend of the
family, to marry Mademoiselle Danglars and her two millions. Debray did
not defend himself very warmly, for the idea had sometimes crossed his
mind; still, when he recollected the independent, proud spirit of
Eugénie, he positively rejected it as utterly impossible, though the
same thought again continually recurred and found a resting-place in
his heart. Tea, play, and the conversation, which had become
interesting during the discussion of such serious affairs, lasted till
one o’clock in the morning.

Meanwhile Madame Danglars, veiled and uneasy, awaited the return of
Debray in the little green room, seated between two baskets of flowers,
which she had that morning sent, and which, it must be confessed,
Debray had himself arranged and watered with so much care that his
absence was half excused in the eyes of the poor woman.

At twenty minutes to twelve, Madame Danglars, tired of waiting,
returned home. Women of a certain grade are like prosperous grisettes
in one respect, they seldom return home after twelve o’clock. The
baroness returned to the hotel with as much caution as Eugénie used in
leaving it; she ran lightly upstairs, and with an aching heart entered
her apartment, contiguous, as we know, to that of Eugénie. She was
fearful of exciting any remark, and believed firmly in her daughter’s
innocence and fidelity to the paternal roof. She listened at Eugénie’s
door, and hearing no sound tried to enter, but the bolts were in place.
Madame Danglars then concluded that the young girl had been overcome
with the terrible excitement of the evening, and had gone to bed and to
sleep. She called the maid and questioned her.

“Mademoiselle Eugénie,” said the maid, “retired to her apartment with
Mademoiselle d’Armilly; they then took tea together, after which they
desired me to leave, saying that they needed me no longer.”

Since then the maid had been below, and like everyone else she thought
the young ladies were in their own room; Madame Danglars, therefore,
went to bed without a shadow of suspicion, and began to muse over the
recent events. In proportion as her memory became clearer, the
occurrences of the evening were revealed in their true light; what she
had taken for confusion was a tumult; what she had regarded as
something distressing, was in reality a disgrace. And then the baroness
remembered that she had felt no pity for poor Mercédès, who had been
afflicted with as severe a blow through her husband and son.

“Eugénie,” she said to herself, “is lost, and so are we. The affair, as
it will be reported, will cover us with shame; for in a society such as
ours satire inflicts a painful and incurable wound.