The steward
could not restrain himself.

“Move, monsieur—move away, I entreat you; you are exactly in the spot!”

“What spot?”

“Where he fell.”

20281m



“My dear Monsieur Bertuccio,” said Monte Cristo, laughing, “control
yourself; we are not at Sartène or at Corte. This is not a Corsican
_maquis_ but an English garden; badly kept, I own, but still you must
not calumniate it for that.”

“Monsieur, I implore you do not stay there!”

“I think you are going mad, Bertuccio,” said the count coldly. “If that
is the case, I warn you, I shall have you put in a lunatic asylum.”

“Alas! excellency,” returned Bertuccio, joining his hands, and shaking
his head in a manner that would have excited the count’s laughter, had
not thoughts of a superior interest occupied him, and rendered him
attentive to the least revelation of this timorous conscience. “Alas!
excellency, the evil has arrived!”

“M. Bertuccio,” said the count, “I am very glad to tell you, that while
you gesticulate, you wring your hands and roll your eyes like a man
possessed by a devil who will not leave him; and I have always
observed, that the devil most obstinate to be expelled is a secret. I
knew you were a Corsican. I knew you were gloomy, and always brooding
over some old history of the vendetta; and I overlooked that in Italy,
because in Italy those things are thought nothing of. But in France
they are considered in very bad taste; there are gendarmes who occupy
themselves with such affairs, judges who condemn, and scaffolds which
avenge.”

Bertuccio clasped his hands, and as, in all these evolutions, he did
not let fall the lantern, the light showed his pale and altered
countenance. Monte Cristo examined him with the same look that, at
Rome, he had bent upon the execution of Andrea, and then, in a tone
that made a shudder pass through the veins of the poor steward—

“The Abbé Busoni, then told me an untruth,” said he, “when, after his
journey in France, in 1829, he sent you to me, with a letter of
recommendation, in which he enumerated all your valuable qualities.
Well, I shall write to the abbé; I shall hold him responsible for his
_protégé’s_ misconduct, and I shall soon know all about this
assassination. Only I warn you, that when I reside in a country, I
conform to all its code, and I have no wish to put myself within the
compass of the French laws for your sake.”

“Oh, do not do that, excellency; I have always served you faithfully,”
cried Bertuccio, in despair. “I have always been an honest man, and, as
far as lay in my power, I have done good.”

“I do not deny it,” returned the count; “but why are you thus agitated.
It is a bad sign; a quiet conscience does not occasion such paleness in
the cheeks, and such fever in the hands of a man.”

“But, your excellency,” replied Bertuccio hesitatingly, “did not the
Abbé Busoni, who heard my confession in the prison at Nîmes, tell you
that I had a heavy burden upon my conscience?”

“Yes; but as he said you would make an excellent steward, I concluded
you had stolen—that was all.”

“Oh, your excellency!” returned Bertuccio in deep contempt.

“Or, as you are a Corsican, that you had been unable to resist the
desire of making a ‘stiff,’ as you call it.”

“Yes, my good master,” cried Bertuccio, casting himself at the count’s
feet, “it was simply vengeance—nothing else.”

“I understand that, but I do not understand what it is that galvanizes
you in this manner.”

“But, monsieur, it is very natural,” returned Bertuccio, “since it was
in this house that my vengeance was accomplished.”

“What! my house?”

“Oh, your excellency, it was not yours, then.”

“Whose, then? The Marquis de Saint-Méran, I think, the concierge said.
What had you to revenge on the Marquis de Saint-Méran?”

“Oh, it was not on him, monsieur; it was on another.”

“This is strange,” returned Monte Cristo, seeming to yield to his
reflections, “that you should find yourself without any preparation in
a house where the event happened that causes you so much remorse.”

“Monsieur,” said the steward, “it is fatality, I am sure. First, you
purchase a house at Auteuil—this house is the one where I have
committed an assassination; you descend to the garden by the same
staircase by which he descended; you stop at the spot where he received
the blow; and two paces farther is the grave in which he had just
buried his child. This is not chance, for chance, in this case, is too
much like Providence.”

“Well, amiable Corsican, let us suppose it is Providence. I always
suppose anything people please, and, besides, you must concede
something to diseased minds. Come, collect yourself, and tell me all.”

“I have related it but once, and that was to the Abbé Busoni. Such
things,” continued Bertuccio, shaking his head, “are only related under
the seal of confession.”

“Then,” said the count, “I refer you to your confessor. Turn Chartreux
or Trappist, and relate your secrets, but, as for me, I do not like
anyone who is alarmed by such phantasms, and I do not choose that my
servants should be afraid to walk in the garden of an evening. I
confess I am not very desirous of a visit from the commissary of
police, for, in Italy, justice is only paid when silent—in France she
is paid only when she speaks. _Peste!_ I thought you somewhat Corsican,
a great deal smuggler, and an excellent steward; but I see you have
other strings to your bow. You are no longer in my service, Monsieur
Bertuccio.”

“Oh, your excellency, your excellency!” cried the steward, struck with
terror at this threat, “if that is the only reason I cannot remain in
your service, I will tell all, for if I quit you, it will only be to go
to the scaffold.”

“That is different,” replied Monte Cristo; “but if you intend to tell
an untruth, reflect it were better not to speak at all.”

“No, monsieur, I swear to you, by my hopes of salvation, I will tell
you all, for the Abbé Busoni himself only knew a part of my secret;
but, I pray you, go away from that plane-tree. The moon is just
bursting through the clouds, and there, standing where you do, and
wrapped in that cloak that conceals your figure, you remind me of M. de
Villefort.”

“What!” cried Monte Cristo, “it was M. de Villefort?”

“Your excellency knows him?”

“The former royal attorney at Nîmes?”

“Yes.”

“Who married the Marquis of Saint-Méran’s daughter?”

“Yes.”

“Who enjoyed the reputation of being the most severe, the most upright,
the most rigid magistrate on the bench?”

“Well, monsieur,” said Bertuccio, “this man with this spotless
reputation——”

“Well?”

“Was a villain.”

“Bah,” replied Monte Cristo, “impossible!”

“It is as I tell you.”

“Ah, really,” said Monte Cristo. “Have you proof of this?”

“I had it.”

“And you have lost it; how stupid!”

“Yes; but by careful search it might be recovered.”

“Really,” returned the count, “relate it to me, for it begins to
interest me.”

And the count, humming an air from _Lucia_, went to sit down on a
bench, while Bertuccio followed him, collecting his thoughts. Bertuccio
remained standing before him.

20285m




 Chapter 44. The Vendetta

At what point shall I begin my story, your excellency?” asked
Bertuccio.

“Where you please,” returned Monte Cristo, “since I know nothing at all
of it.”

“I thought the Abbé Busoni had told your excellency.”

“Some particulars, doubtless, but that is seven or eight years ago, and
I have forgotten them.”

“Then I can speak without fear of tiring your excellency.”

“Go on, M. Bertuccio; you will supply the want of the evening papers.”

“The story begins in 1815.”

“Ah,” said Monte Cristo, “1815 is not yesterday.”

“No, monsieur, and yet I recollect all things as clearly as if they had
happened but then. I had a brother, an elder brother, who was in the
service of the emperor; he had become lieutenant in a regiment composed
entirely of Corsicans. This brother was my only friend; we became
orphans—I at five, he at eighteen. He brought me up as if I had been
his son, and in 1814 he married. When the emperor returned from the
Island of Elba, my brother instantly joined the army, was slightly
wounded at Waterloo, and retired with the army beyond the Loire.”

“But that is the history of the Hundred Days, M. Bertuccio,” said the
count; “unless I am mistaken, it has been already written.”

“Excuse me, excellency, but these details are necessary, and you
promised to be patient.”

“Go on; I will keep my word.”

“One day we received a letter. I should tell you that we lived in the
little village of Rogliano, at the extremity of Cap Corse. This letter
was from my brother. He told us that the army was disbanded, and that
he should return by Châteauroux, Clermont-Ferrand, Le Puy, and Nîmes;
and, if I had any money, he prayed me to leave it for him at Nîmes,
with an innkeeper with whom I had dealings.”

“In the smuggling line?” said Monte Cristo.

“Eh, your excellency? Everyone must live.”

“Certainly; go on.”

“I loved my brother tenderly, as I told your excellency, and I resolved
not to send the money, but to take it to him myself. I possessed a
thousand francs. I left five hundred with Assunta, my sister-in-law,
and with the other five hundred I set off for Nîmes. It was easy to do
so, and as I had my boat and a lading to take in at sea, everything
favored my project. But, after we had taken in our cargo, the wind
became contrary, so that we were four or five days without being able
to enter the Rhône. At last, however, we succeeded, and worked up to
Arles. I left the boat between Bellegarde and Beaucaire, and took the
road to Nîmes.”

“We are getting to the story now?”

“Yes, your excellency; excuse me, but, as you will see, I only tell you
what is absolutely necessary. Just at this time the famous massacres
took place in the south of France.