”

“As for me, you must know I cannot possibly live out of Lucca;
therefore I shall return to Italy as soon as I can.”

“But before you leave France, my dear father, I hope you will put me in
possession of the documents which will be necessary to prove my
descent.”

“Certainly; I am come expressly on that account; it has cost me much
trouble to find you, but I had resolved on giving them into your hands,
and if I had to recommence my search, it would occupy all the few
remaining years of my life.”

“Where are these papers, then?”

“Here they are.”

Andrea seized the certificate of his father’s marriage and his own
baptismal register, and after having opened them with all the eagerness
which might be expected under the circumstances, he read them with a
facility which proved that he was accustomed to similar documents, and
with an expression which plainly denoted an unusual interest in the
contents. When he had perused the documents, an indefinable expression
of pleasure lighted up his countenance, and looking at the major with a
most peculiar smile, he said, in very excellent Tuscan:

“Then there is no longer any such thing, in Italy as being condemned to
the galleys?”

The major drew himself up to his full height.

“Why?—what do you mean by that question?”

“I mean that if there were, it would be impossible to draw up with
impunity two such deeds as these. In France, my dear sir, half such a
piece of effrontery as that would cause you to be quickly despatched to
Toulon for five years, for change of air.”

“Will you be good enough to explain your meaning?” said the major,
endeavoring as much as possible to assume an air of the greatest
majesty.

“My dear M. Cavalcanti,” said Andrea, taking the major by the arm in a
confidential manner, “how much are you paid for being my father?”

The major was about to speak, when Andrea continued, in a low voice:

“Nonsense, I am going to set you an example of confidence, they give me
50,000 francs a year to be your son; consequently, you can understand
that it is not at all likely I shall ever deny my parent.”

The major looked anxiously around him.

“Make yourself easy, we are quite alone,” said Andrea; “besides, we are
conversing in Italian.”

“Well, then,” replied the major, “they paid me 50,000 francs down.”

“Monsieur Cavalcanti,” said Andrea, “do you believe in fairy tales?”

“I used not to do so, but I really feel now almost obliged to have
faith in them.”

“You have, then, been induced to alter your opinion; you have had some
proofs of their truth?” The major drew from his pocket a handful of
gold.

“Most palpable proofs,” said he, “as you may perceive.”

“You think, then, that I may rely on the count’s promises?”

“Certainly I do.”

“You are sure he will keep his word with me?”

“To the letter, but at the same time, remember, we must continue to
play our respective parts. I, as a tender father——”

“And I as a dutiful son, as they choose that I shall be descended from
you.”

“Whom do you mean by they?”

“_Ma foi_, I can hardly tell, but I was alluding to those who wrote the
letter; you received one, did you not?”

“Yes.”

“From whom?”

“From a certain Abbé Busoni.”

“Have you any knowledge of him?”

“No, I have never seen him.”

“What did he say in the letter?”

“You will promise not to betray me?”

“Rest assured of that; you well know that our interests are the same.”

“Then read for yourself;” and the major gave a letter into the young
man’s hand. Andrea read in a low voice:

“‘You are poor; a miserable old age awaits you. Would you like to
become rich, or at least independent? Set out immediately for Paris,
and demand of the Count of Monte Cristo, Avenue des Champs-Élysées, No.
30, the son whom you had by the Marchesa Corsinari, and who was taken
from you at five years of age. This son is named Andrea Cavalcanti. In
order that you may not doubt the kind intention of the writer of this
letter, you will find enclosed an order for 2,400 francs, payable in
Florence, at Signor Gozzi’s; also a letter of introduction to the Count
of Monte Cristo, on whom I give you a draft of 48,000 francs. Remember
to go to the count on the 26th May at seven o’clock in the evening.


“(Signed) ‘Abbé Busoni.’”


“It is the same.”

“What do you mean?” said the major.

“I was going to say that I received a letter almost to the same
effect.”

“You?”

“Yes.”

“From the Abbé Busoni?”

“No.”

“From whom, then?”

“From an Englishman, called Lord Wilmore, who takes the name of Sinbad
the Sailor.”

“And of whom you have no more knowledge than I of the Abbé Busoni?”

“You are mistaken; there I am ahead of you.”

“You have seen him, then?”

“Yes, once.”

“Where?”

“Ah, that is just what I cannot tell you; if I did, I should make you
as wise as myself, which it is not my intention to do.”

“And what did the letter contain?”

“Read it.”

“‘You are poor, and your future prospects are dark and gloomy. Do you
wish for a name? should you like to be rich, and your own master?’”


“_Parbleu!_” said the young man; “was it possible there could be two
answers to such a question?”

“‘Take the post-chaise which you will find waiting at the Porte de
Gênes, as you enter Nice; pass through Turin, Chambéry, and
Pont-de-Beauvoisin. Go to the Count of Monte Cristo, Avenue des
Champs-Élysées, on the 26th of May, at seven o’clock in the evening,
and demand of him your father. You are the son of the Marchese
Cavalcanti and the Marchesa Oliva Corsinari. The marquis will give you
some papers which will certify this fact, and authorize you to appear
under that name in the Parisian world. As to your rank, an annual
income of 50,000 livres will enable you to support it admirably. I
enclose a draft for 5,000 livres, payable on M. Ferrea, banker at Nice,
and also a letter of introduction to the Count of Monte Cristo, whom I
have directed to supply all your wants.


“‘Sinbad the Sailor.’”


“Humph,” said the major; “very good. You have seen the count, you say?”

“I have only just left him.”

“And has he conformed to all that the letter specified?”

“He has.”

“Do you understand it?”

“Not in the least.”

“There is a dupe somewhere.”

“At all events, it is neither you nor I.”

“Certainly not.”

“Well, then——”

“Why, it does not much concern us, do you think it does?”

“No; I agree with you there. We must play the game to the end, and
consent to be blindfolded.”

“Ah, you shall see; I promise you I will sustain my part to
admiration.”

“I never once doubted your doing so.” Monte Cristo chose this moment
for re-entering the drawing-room. On hearing the sound of his
footsteps, the two men threw themselves in each other’s arms, and while
they were in the midst of this embrace, the count entered.

“Well, marquis,” said Monte Cristo, “you appear to be in no way
disappointed in the son whom your good fortune has restored to you.”

“Ah, your excellency, I am overwhelmed with delight.”

“And what are your feelings?” said Monte Cristo, turning to the young
man.

“As for me, my heart is overflowing with happiness.”

“Happy father, happy son!” said the count.

“There is only one thing which grieves me,” observed the major, “and
that is the necessity for my leaving Paris so soon.”

“Ah, my dear M. Cavalcanti, I trust you will not leave before I have
had the honor of presenting you to some of my friends.”

“I am at your service, sir,” replied the major.

“Now, sir,” said Monte Cristo, addressing Andrea, “make your
confession.”

“To whom?”

“Tell M. Cavalcanti something of the state of your finances.”

“_Ma foi!_ monsieur, you have touched upon a tender chord.”

“Do you hear what he says, major?”

“Certainly I do.”

“But do you understand?”

“I do.”

“Your son says he requires money.”

“Well, what would you have me do?” said the major.

“You should furnish him with some of course,” replied Monte Cristo.

“I?”

“Yes, you,” said the count, at the same time advancing towards Andrea,
and slipping a packet of bank-notes into the young man’s hand.

“What is this?”

“It is from your father.”

“From my father?”

“Yes; did you not tell him just now that you wanted money? Well, then,
he deputes me to give you this.”

“Am I to consider this as part of my income on account?”

“No, it is for the first expenses of your settling in Paris.”

“Ah, how good my dear father is!”

“Silence,” said Monte Cristo; “he does not wish you to know that it
comes from him.”

“I fully appreciate his delicacy,” said Andrea, cramming the notes
hastily into his pocket.

“And now, gentlemen, I wish you good-morning,” said Monte Cristo.

“And when shall we have the honor of seeing you again, your
excellency?” asked Cavalcanti.

“Ah,” said Andrea, “when may we hope for that pleasure?”

“On Saturday, if you will—Yes.—Let me see—Saturday—I am to dine at my
country house, at Auteuil, on that day, Rue de la Fontaine, No. 28.
Several persons are invited, and among others, M. Danglars, your
banker. I will introduce you to him, for it will be necessary he should
know you, as he is to pay your money.”

“Full dress?” said the major, half aloud.

“Oh, yes, certainly,” said the count; “uniform, cross, knee-breeches.”

“And how shall I be dressed?” demanded Andrea.

30145m



“Oh, very simply; black trousers, patent leather boots, white
waistcoat, either a black or blue coat, and a long cravat. Go to Blin
or Véronique for your clothes. Baptistin will tell you where, if you do
not know their address. The less pretension there is in your attire,
the better will be the effect, as you are a rich man. If you mean to
buy any horses, get them of Devedeux, and if you purchase a phaeton, go
to Baptiste for it.”

“At what hour shall we come?” asked the young man.

“About half-past six.”

“We will be with you at that time,” said the major.