Furnished with this plunder, Andrea leaped with a lighter heart from
the window, intending to slip through the hands of the gendarmes. Tall
and well proportioned as an ancient gladiator, and muscular as a
Spartan, he walked for a quarter of an hour without knowing where to
direct his steps, actuated by the sole idea of getting away from the
spot where if he lingered he knew that he would surely be taken. Having
passed through the Rue du Mont-Blanc, guided by the instinct which
leads thieves always to take the safest path, he found himself at the
end of the Rue La Fayette. There he stopped, breathless and panting. He
was quite alone; on one side was the vast wilderness of the
Saint-Lazare, on the other, Paris enshrouded in darkness.

“Am I to be captured?” he cried; “no, not if I can use more activity
than my enemies. My safety is now a mere question of speed.”

At this moment he saw a cab at the top of the Faubourg Poissonnière.
The dull driver, smoking his pipe, was plodding along toward the limits
of the Faubourg Saint-Denis, where no doubt he ordinarily had his
station.

“Ho, friend!” said Benedetto.

“What do you want, sir?” asked the driver.

“Is your horse tired?”

“Tired? oh, yes, tired enough—he has done nothing the whole of this
blessed day! Four wretched fares, and twenty sous over, making in all
seven francs, are all that I have earned, and I ought to take ten to
the owner.”

“Will you add these twenty francs to the seven you have?”

“With pleasure, sir; twenty francs are not to be despised. Tell me what
I am to do for this.”

“A very easy thing, if your horse isn’t tired.”

“I tell you he’ll go like the wind,—only tell me which way to drive.”

“Towards the Louvres.”

“Ah, I know the way—you get good sweetened rum over there.”

“Exactly so; I merely wish to overtake one of my friends, with whom I
am going to hunt tomorrow at Chapelle-en-Serval. He should have waited
for me here with a cabriolet till half-past eleven; it is twelve, and,
tired of waiting, he must have gone on.”

“It is likely.”

“Well, will you try and overtake him?”

“Nothing I should like better.”

“If you do not overtake him before we reach Bourget you shall have
twenty francs; if not before Louvres, thirty.”

“And if we do overtake him?”

“Forty,” said Andrea, after a moment’s hesitation, at the end of which
he remembered that he might safely promise.

“That’s all right,” said the man; “hop in, and we’re off! Who-o-o-pla!”

Andrea got into the cab, which passed rapidly through the Faubourg
Saint-Denis, along the Faubourg Saint-Martin, crossed the barrier, and
threaded its way through the interminable Villette. They never overtook
the chimerical friend, yet Andrea frequently inquired of people on foot
whom he passed and at the inns which were not yet closed, for a green
cabriolet and bay horse; and as there are a great many cabriolets to be
seen on the road to the Low Countries, and as nine-tenths of them are
green, the inquiries increased at every step. Everyone had just seen it
pass; it was only five hundred, two hundred, one hundred steps in
advance; at length they reached it, but it was not the friend. Once the
cab was also passed by a calash rapidly whirled along by two
post-horses.

“Ah,” said Cavalcanti to himself, “if I only had that britzka, those
two good post-horses, and above all the passport that carries them on!”
And he sighed deeply.

The calash contained Mademoiselle Danglars and Mademoiselle d’Armilly.

“Hurry, hurry!” said Andrea, “we must overtake him soon.”

And the poor horse resumed the desperate gallop it had kept up since
leaving the barrier, and arrived steaming at Louvres.

“Certainly,” said Andrea, “I shall not overtake my friend, but I shall
kill your horse, therefore I had better stop. Here are thirty francs; I
will sleep at the _Cheval Rouge_, and will secure a place in the first
coach. Good-night, friend.”

And Andrea, after placing six pieces of five francs each in the man’s
hand, leaped lightly on to the pathway. The cabman joyfully pocketed
the sum, and turned back on his road to Paris. Andrea pretended to go
towards the hotel of the _Cheval Rouge_, but after leaning an instant
against the door, and hearing the last sound of the cab, which was
disappearing from view, he went on his road, and with a lusty stride
soon traversed the space of two leagues. Then he rested; he must be
near Chapelle-en-Serval, where he pretended to be going.

It was not fatigue that stayed Andrea here; it was that he might form
some resolution, adopt some plan. It would be impossible to make use of
a diligence, equally so to engage post-horses; to travel either way a
passport was necessary. It was still more impossible to remain in the
department of the Oise, one of the most open and strictly guarded in
France; this was quite out of the question, especially to a man like
Andrea, perfectly conversant with criminal matters.

He sat down by the side of the moat, buried his face in his hands and
reflected. Ten minutes after he raised his head; his resolution was
made. He threw some dust over the topcoat, which he had found time to
unhook from the antechamber and button over his ball costume, and going
to Chapelle-en-Serval he knocked loudly at the door of the only inn in
the place.

The host opened.

“My friend,” said Andrea, “I was coming from Mortefontaine to Senlis,
when my horse, which is a troublesome creature, stumbled and threw me.
I must reach Compiègne tonight, or I shall cause deep anxiety to my
family. Could you let me hire a horse of you?”

An innkeeper has always a horse to let, whether it be good or bad. The
host called the stable-boy, and ordered him to saddle _Le Blanc_ then
he awoke his son, a child of seven years, whom he ordered to ride
before the gentleman and bring back the horse. Andrea gave the
innkeeper twenty francs, and in taking them from his pocket dropped a
visiting card. This belonged to one of his friends at the Café de
Paris, so that the innkeeper, picking it up after Andrea had left, was
convinced that he had let his horse to the Count of Mauléon, 25 Rue
Saint-Dominique, that being the name and address on the card.

_Le Blanc_ was not a fast animal, but he kept up an easy, steady pace;
in three hours and a half Andrea had traversed the nine leagues which
separated him from Compiègne, and four o’clock struck as he reached the
place where the coaches stop. There is an excellent tavern at
Compiègne, well remembered by those who have ever been there. Andrea,
who had often stayed there in his rides about Paris, recollected the
Bell and Bottle inn; he turned around, saw the sign by the light of a
reflected lamp, and having dismissed the child, giving him all the
small coin he had about him, he began knocking at the door, very
reasonably concluding that having now three or four hours before him he
had best fortify himself against the fatigues of the morrow by a sound
sleep and a good supper. A waiter opened the door.

“My friend,” said Andrea, “I have been dining at Saint-Jean-aux-Bois,
and expected to catch the coach which passes by at midnight, but like a
fool I have lost my way, and have been walking for the last four hours
in the forest. Show me into one of those pretty little rooms which
overlook the court, and bring me a cold fowl and a bottle of Bordeaux.”

The waiter had no suspicions; Andrea spoke with perfect composure, he
had a cigar in his mouth, and his hands in the pocket of his top coat;
his clothes were fashionably made, his chin smooth, his boots
irreproachable; he looked merely as if he had stayed out very late,
that was all. While the waiter was preparing his room, the hostess
arose; Andrea assumed his most charming smile, and asked if he could
have No. 3, which he had occupied on his last stay at Compiègne.
Unfortunately, No. 3 was engaged by a young man who was travelling with
his sister. Andrea appeared in despair, but consoled himself when the
hostess assured him that No. 7, prepared for him, was situated
precisely the same as No. 3, and while warming his feet and chatting
about the last races at Chantilly, he waited until they announced his
room to be ready.

Andrea had not spoken without cause of the pretty rooms looking out
upon the court of the Bell Hotel, which with its triple galleries like
those of a theatre, with the jessamine and clematis twining round the
light columns, forms one of the prettiest entrances to an inn that you
can imagine. The fowl was tender, the wine old, the fire clear and
sparkling, and Andrea was surprised to find himself eating with as good
an appetite as though nothing had happened. Then he went to bed and
almost immediately fell into that deep sleep which is sure to visit men
of twenty years of age, even when they are torn with remorse. Now, here
we are obliged to own that Andrea ought to have felt remorse, but that
he did not.

This was the plan which had appealed to him to afford the best chance
of his security. Before daybreak he would awake, leave the inn after
rigorously paying his bill, and reaching the forest, he would, under
pretence of making studies in painting, test the hospitality of some
peasants, procure himself the dress of a woodcutter and a hatchet,
casting off the lion’s skin to assume that of the woodman; then, with
his hands covered with dirt, his hair darkened by means of a leaden
comb, his complexion embrowned with a preparation for which one of his
old comrades had given him the recipe, he intended, by following the
wooded districts, to reach the nearest frontier, walking by night and
sleeping in the day in the forests and quarries, and only entering
inhabited regions to buy a loaf from time to time.

Once past the frontier, Andrea proposed making money of his diamonds;
and by uniting the proceeds to ten bank-notes he always carried about
with him in case of accident, he would then find himself possessor of
about 50,000 livres, which he philosophically considered as no very
deplorable condition after all.