”

“Your highness had already expressed that wish,” said Bertuccio, “and
the horses are ready. I have bought them, and stationed them myself at
the most desirable posts, that is, in villages, where no one generally
stops.”

“That’s well,” said Monte Cristo; “I remain here a day or two—arrange
accordingly.”

As Bertuccio was leaving the room to give the requisite orders,
Baptistin opened the door: he held a letter on a silver waiter.

“What are you doing here?” asked the count, seeing him covered with
dust; “I did not send for you, I think?”

Baptistin, without answering, approached the count, and presented the
letter. “Important and urgent,” said he.

The count opened the letter, and read:

“‘M. de Monte Cristo is apprised that this night a man will enter his
house in the Champs-Élysées with the intention of carrying off some
papers supposed to be in the secretaire in the dressing-room. The
count’s well-known courage will render unnecessary the aid of the
police, whose interference might seriously affect him who sends this
advice. The count, by any opening from the bedroom, or by concealing
himself in the dressing-room, would be able to defend his property
himself. Many attendants or apparent precautions would prevent the
villain from the attempt, and M. de Monte Cristo would lose the
opportunity of discovering an enemy whom chance has revealed to him who
now sends this warning to the count,—a warning he might not be able to
send another time, if this first attempt should fail and another be
made.’”


The count’s first idea was that this was an artifice—a gross deception,
to draw his attention from a minor danger in order to expose him to a
greater. He was on the point of sending the letter to the commissary of
police, notwithstanding the advice of his anonymous friend, or perhaps
because of that advice, when suddenly the idea occurred to him that it
might be some personal enemy, whom he alone should recognize and over
whom, if such were the case, he alone would gain any advantage, as
Fiesco17 had done over the Moor who would have killed him. We know the
count’s vigorous and daring mind, denying anything to be impossible,
with that energy which marks the great man.

From his past life, from his resolution to shrink from nothing, the
count had acquired an inconceivable relish for the contests in which he
had engaged, sometimes against nature, that is to say, against God, and
sometimes against the world, that is, against the devil.

“They do not want my papers,” said Monte Cristo, “they want to kill me;
they are no robbers, but assassins. I will not allow the prefect of
police to interfere with my private affairs. I am rich enough,
forsooth, to distribute his authority on this occasion.”

The count recalled Baptistin, who had left the room after delivering
the letter.

“Return to Paris,” said he; “assemble the servants who remain there. I
want all my household at Auteuil.”

“But will no one remain in the house, my lord?” asked Baptistin.

“Yes, the porter.”

“My lord will remember that the lodge is at a distance from the house.”

“Well?”

“The house might be stripped without his hearing the least noise.”

“By whom?”

“By thieves.”

“You are a fool, M. Baptistin. Thieves might strip the house—it would
annoy me less than to be disobeyed.” Baptistin bowed.

40150m



“You understand me?” said the count. “Bring your comrades here, one and
all; but let everything remain as usual, only close the shutters of the
ground floor.”

“And those of the first floor?”

“You know they are never closed. Go!”

The count signified his intention of dining alone, and that no one but
Ali should attend him. Having dined with his usual tranquillity and
moderation, the count, making a signal to Ali to follow him, went out
by the side-gate and on reaching the Bois de Boulogne turned,
apparently without design towards Paris and at twilight; found himself
opposite his house in the Champs-Élysées. All was dark; one solitary,
feeble light was burning in the porter’s lodge, about forty paces
distant from the house, as Baptistin had said.

Monte Cristo leaned against a tree, and with that scrutinizing glance
which was so rarely deceived, looked up and down the avenue, examined
the passers-by, and carefully looked down the neighboring streets, to
see that no one was concealed. Ten minutes passed thus, and he was
convinced that no one was watching him. He hastened to the side-door
with Ali, entered hurriedly, and by the servants’ staircase, of which
he had the key, gained his bedroom without opening or disarranging a
single curtain, without even the porter having the slightest suspicion
that the house, which he supposed empty, contained its chief occupant.

Arrived in his bedroom, the count motioned to Ali to stop; then he
passed into the dressing-room, which he examined. Everything appeared
as usual—the precious secretaire in its place, and the key in the
secretaire. He double locked it, took the key, returned to the bedroom
door, removed the double staple of the bolt, and went in. Meanwhile Ali
had procured the arms the count required—namely, a short carbine and a
pair of double-barrelled pistols, with which as sure an aim might be
taken as with a single-barrelled one. Thus armed, the count held the
lives of five men in his hands. It was about half-past nine.

The count and Ali ate in haste a crust of bread and drank a glass of
Spanish wine; then Monte Cristo slipped aside one of the movable
panels, which enabled him to see into the adjoining room. He had within
his reach his pistols and carbine, and Ali, standing near him, held one
of the small Arabian hatchets, whose form has not varied since the
Crusades. Through one of the windows of the bedroom, on a line with
that in the dressing-room, the count could see into the street.

Two hours passed thus. It was intensely dark; still Ali, thanks to his
wild nature, and the count, thanks doubtless to his long confinement,
could distinguish in the darkness the slightest movement of the trees.
The little light in the lodge had long been extinct. It might be
expected that the attack, if indeed an attack was projected, would be
made from the staircase of the ground floor, and not from a window; in
Monte Cristo’s opinion, the villains sought his life, not his money. It
would be his bedroom they would attack, and they must reach it by the
back staircase, or by the window in the dressing-room.

The clock of the Invalides struck a quarter to twelve; the west wind
bore on its moistened gusts the doleful vibration of the three strokes.

40152m



As the last stroke died away, the count thought he heard a slight noise
in the dressing-room; this first sound, or rather this first grinding,
was followed by a second, then a third; at the fourth, the count knew
what to expect. A firm and well-practised hand was engaged in cutting
the four sides of a pane of glass with a diamond. The count felt his
heart beat more rapidly.

Inured as men may be to danger, forewarned as they may be of peril,
they understand, by the fluttering of the heart and the shuddering of
the frame, the enormous difference between a dream and a reality,
between the project and the execution. However, Monte Cristo only made
a sign to apprise Ali, who, understanding that danger was approaching
from the other side, drew nearer to his master. Monte Cristo was eager
to ascertain the strength and number of his enemies.

The window whence the noise proceeded was opposite the opening by which
the count could see into the dressing-room. He fixed his eyes on that
window—he distinguished a shadow in the darkness; then one of the panes
became quite opaque, as if a sheet of paper were stuck on the outside,
then the square cracked without falling. Through the opening an arm was
passed to find the fastening, then a second; the window turned on its
hinges, and a man entered. He was alone.

“That’s a daring rascal,” whispered the count.

At that moment Ali touched him slightly on the shoulder. He turned; Ali
pointed to the window of the room in which they were, facing the
street.

“I see!” said he, “there are two of them; one does the work while the
other stands guard.” He made a sign to Ali not to lose sight of the man
in the street, and turned to the one in the dressing-room.

The glass-cutter had entered, and was feeling his way, his arms
stretched out before him. At last he appeared to have made himself
familiar with his surroundings. There were two doors; he bolted them
both.

When he drew near to the bedroom door, Monte Cristo expected that he
was coming in, and raised one of his pistols; but he simply heard the
sound of the bolts sliding in their copper rings. It was only a
precaution. The nocturnal visitor, ignorant of the fact that the count
had removed the staples, might now think himself at home, and pursue
his purpose with full security. Alone and free to act as he wished, the
man then drew from his pocket something which the count could not
discern, placed it on a stand, then went straight to the secretaire,
felt the lock, and contrary to his expectation found that the key was
missing. But the glass-cutter was a prudent man who had provided for
all emergencies. The count soon heard the rattling of a bunch of
skeleton keys, such as the locksmith brings when called to force a
lock, and which thieves call nightingales, doubtless from the music of
their nightly song when they grind against the bolt.

“Ah, ha,” whispered Monte Cristo with a smile of disappointment, “he is
only a thief.”

But the man in the dark could not find the right key. He reached the
instrument he had placed on the stand, touched a spring, and
immediately a pale light, just bright enough to render objects
distinct, was reflected on his hands and countenance.

“By heavens,” exclaimed Monte Cristo, starting back, “it is——”

Ali raised his hatchet.