“This Count of Monte Cristo is a strange man,” said Emmanuel.

“Yes,” answered Maximilian, “but I feel sure he has an excellent heart,
and that he likes us.”

“His voice went to my heart,” observed Julie; “and two or three times I
fancied that I had heard it before.”



 Chapter 51. Pyramus and Thisbe

About two-thirds of the way along the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, and in the
rear of one of the most imposing mansions in this rich neighborhood,
where the various houses vie with each other for elegance of design and
magnificence of construction, extended a large garden, where the
wide-spreading chestnut-trees raised their heads high above the walls
in a solid rampart, and with the coming of every spring scattered a
shower of delicate pink and white blossoms into the large stone vases
that stood upon the two square pilasters of a curiously wrought iron
gate, that dated from the time of Louis XIII.

This noble entrance, however, in spite of its striking appearance and
the graceful effect of the geraniums planted in the two vases, as they
waved their variegated leaves in the wind and charmed the eye with
their scarlet bloom, had fallen into utter disuse. The proprietors of
the mansion had many years before thought it best to confine themselves
to the possession of the house itself, with its thickly planted
courtyard, opening into the Faubourg Saint-Honoré, and to the garden
shut in by this gate, which formerly communicated with a fine
kitchen-garden of about an acre. For the demon of speculation drew a
line, or in other words projected a street, at the farther side of the
kitchen-garden. The street was laid out, a name was chosen and posted
up on an iron plate, but before construction was begun, it occurred to
the possessor of the property that a handsome sum might be obtained for
the ground then devoted to fruits and vegetables, by building along the
line of the proposed street, and so making it a branch of communication
with the Faubourg Saint-Honoré itself, one of the most important
thoroughfares in the city of Paris.

In matters of speculation, however, though “man proposes,” yet “money
disposes.” From some such difficulty the newly named street died almost
in birth, and the purchaser of the kitchen-garden, having paid a high
price for it, and being quite unable to find anyone willing to take his
bargain off his hands without a considerable loss, yet still clinging
to the belief that at some future day he should obtain a sum for it
that would repay him, not only for his past outlay, but also the
interest upon the capital locked up in his new acquisition, contented
himself with letting the ground temporarily to some market-gardeners,
at a yearly rental of 500 francs.

And so, as we have said, the iron gate leading into the kitchen-garden
had been closed up and left to the rust, which bade fair before long to
eat off its hinges, while to prevent the ignoble glances of the diggers
and delvers of the ground from presuming to sully the aristocratic
enclosure belonging to the mansion, the gate had been boarded up to a
height of six feet. True, the planks were not so closely adjusted but
that a hasty peep might be obtained through their interstices; but the
strict decorum and rigid propriety of the inhabitants of the house left
no grounds for apprehending that advantage would be taken of that
circumstance.

Horticulture seemed, however, to have been abandoned in the deserted
kitchen-garden; and where cabbages, carrots, radishes, peas, and melons
had once flourished, a scanty crop of lucern alone bore evidence of its
being deemed worthy of cultivation. A small, low door gave egress from
the walled space we have been describing into the projected street, the
ground having been abandoned as unproductive by its various renters,
and had now fallen so completely in general estimation as to return not
even the one-half per cent it had originally paid. Towards the house
the chestnut-trees we have before mentioned rose high above the wall,
without in any way affecting the growth of other luxuriant shrubs and
flowers that eagerly dressed forward to fill up the vacant spaces, as
though asserting their right to enjoy the boon of light and air. At one
corner, where the foliage became so thick as almost to shut out day, a
large stone bench and sundry rustic seats indicated that this sheltered
spot was either in general favor or particular use by some inhabitant
of the house, which was faintly discernible through the dense mass of
verdure that partially concealed it, though situated but a hundred
paces off.

Whoever had selected this retired portion of the grounds as the
boundary of a walk, or as a place for meditation, was abundantly
justified in the choice by the absence of all glare, the cool,
refreshing shade, the screen it afforded from the scorching rays of the
sun, that found no entrance there even during the burning days of
hottest summer, the incessant and melodious warbling of birds, and the
entire removal from either the noise of the street or the bustle of the
mansion. On the evening of one of the warmest days spring had yet
bestowed on the inhabitants of Paris, might be seen negligently thrown
upon the stone bench, a book, a parasol, and a work-basket, from which
hung a partly embroidered cambric handkerchief, while at a little
distance from these articles was a young woman, standing close to the
iron gate, endeavoring to discern something on the other side by means
of the openings in the planks,—the earnestness of her attitude and the
fixed gaze with which she seemed to seek the object of her wishes,
proving how much her feelings were interested in the matter.

At that instant the little side-gate leading from the waste ground to
the street was noiselessly opened, and a tall, powerful young man
appeared. He was dressed in a common gray blouse and velvet cap, but
his carefully arranged hair, beard and moustache, all of the richest
and glossiest black, ill accorded with his plebeian attire. After
casting a rapid glance around him, in order to assure himself that he
was unobserved, he entered by the small gate, and, carefully closing
and securing it after him, proceeded with a hurried step towards the
barrier.

At the sight of him she expected, though probably not in such a
costume, the young woman started in terror, and was about to make a
hasty retreat. But the eye of love had already seen, even through the
narrow chinks of the wooden palisades, the movement of the white robe,
and observed the fluttering of the blue sash. Pressing his lips close
to the planks, he exclaimed:

“Don’t be alarmed, Valentine—it is I!”

Again the timid girl found courage to return to the gate, saying, as
she did so:

“And why do you come so late today? It is almost dinner-time, and I had
to use no little diplomacy to get rid of my watchful stepmother, my
too-devoted maid, and my troublesome brother, who is always teasing me
about coming to work at my embroidery, which I am in a fair way never
to get done. So pray excuse yourself as well as you can for having made
me wait, and, after that, tell me why I see you in a dress so singular
that at first I did not recognize you.”

“Dearest Valentine,” said the young man, “the difference between our
respective stations makes me fear to offend you by speaking of my love,
but yet I cannot find myself in your presence without longing to pour
forth my soul, and tell you how fondly I adore you. If it be but to
carry away with me the recollection of such sweet moments, I could even
thank you for chiding me, for it leaves me a gleam of hope, that if you
did not expect me (and that indeed would be worse than vanity to
suppose), at least I was in your thoughts. You asked me the cause of my
being late, and why I come disguised. I will candidly explain the
reason of both, and I trust to your goodness to pardon me. I have
chosen a trade.”

“A trade? Oh, Maximilian, how can you jest at a time when we have such
deep cause for uneasiness?”

“Heaven keep me from jesting with that which is far dearer to me than
life itself! But listen to me, Valentine, and I will tell you all about
it. I became weary of ranging fields and scaling walls, and seriously
alarmed at the idea suggested by you, that if caught hovering about
here your father would very likely have me sent to prison as a thief.
That would compromise the honor of the French army, to say nothing of
the fact that the continual presence of a captain of Spahis in a place
where no warlike projects could be supposed to account for it might
well create surprise; so I have become a gardener, and, consequently,
adopted the costume of my calling.”

“What excessive nonsense you talk, Maximilian!”

“Nonsense? Pray do not call what I consider the wisest action of my
life by such a name. Consider, by becoming a gardener I effectually
screen our meetings from all suspicion or danger.”

30053m



“I beseech of you, Maximilian, to cease trifling, and tell me what you
really mean.”

“Simply, that having ascertained that the piece of ground on which I
stand was to let, I made application for it, was readily accepted by
the proprietor, and am now master of this fine crop of lucern. Think of
that, Valentine! There is nothing now to prevent my building myself a
little hut on my plantation, and residing not twenty yards from you.
Only imagine what happiness that would afford me. I can scarcely
contain myself at the bare idea. Such felicity seems above all price—as
a thing impossible and unattainable. But would you believe that I
purchase all this delight, joy, and happiness, for which I would
cheerfully have surrendered ten years of my life, at the small cost of
500 francs per annum, paid quarterly? Henceforth we have nothing to
fear. I am on my own ground, and have an undoubted right to place a
ladder against the wall, and to look over when I please, without having
any apprehensions of being taken off by the police as a suspicious
character.