“In Madame de Villefort’s room?” he murmured and slowly returned, with
one hand wiping his forehead, and with the other supporting himself
against the wall. To enter the room he must again see the body of his
unfortunate wife. To call Edward he must reawaken the echo of that room
which now appeared like a sepulchre; to speak seemed like violating the
silence of the tomb. His tongue was paralyzed in his mouth.

“Edward!” he stammered—“Edward!”

The child did not answer. Where, then, could he be, if he had entered
his mother’s room and not since returned? He stepped forward. The
corpse of Madame de Villefort was stretched across the doorway leading
to the room in which Edward must be; those glaring eyes seemed to watch
over the threshold, and the lips bore the stamp of a terrible and
mysterious irony. Through the open door was visible a portion of the
boudoir, containing an upright piano and a blue satin couch. Villefort
stepped forward two or three paces, and beheld his child lying—no doubt
asleep—on the sofa. The unhappy man uttered an exclamation of joy; a
ray of light seemed to penetrate the abyss of despair and darkness. He
had only to step over the corpse, enter the boudoir, take the child in
his arms, and flee far, far away.

Villefort was no longer the civilized man; he was a tiger hurt unto
death, gnashing his teeth in his wound. He no longer feared realities,
but phantoms. He leaped over the corpse as if it had been a burning
brazier. He took the child in his arms, embraced him, shook him, called
him, but the child made no response. He pressed his burning lips to the
cheeks, but they were icy cold and pale; he felt the stiffened limbs;
he pressed his hand upon the heart, but it no longer beat,—the child
was dead.

A folded paper fell from Edward’s breast. Villefort, thunderstruck,
fell upon his knees; the child dropped from his arms, and rolled on the
floor by the side of its mother. He picked up the paper, and,
recognizing his wife’s writing, ran his eyes rapidly over its contents;
it ran as follows:

“You know that I was a good mother, since it was for my son’s sake I
became criminal. A good mother cannot depart without her son.”

Villefort could not believe his eyes,—he could not believe his reason;
he dragged himself towards the child’s body, and examined it as a
lioness contemplates its dead cub. Then a piercing cry escaped from his
breast, and he cried,

“Still the hand of God.”

The presence of the two victims alarmed him; he could not bear solitude
shared only by two corpses. Until then he had been sustained by rage,
by his strength of mind, by despair, by the supreme agony which led the
Titans to scale the heavens, and Ajax to defy the gods. He now arose,
his head bowed beneath the weight of grief, and, shaking his damp,
dishevelled hair, he who had never felt compassion for anyone
determined to seek his father, that he might have someone to whom he
could relate his misfortunes,—someone by whose side he might weep.

50195m



He descended the little staircase with which we are acquainted, and
entered Noirtier’s room. The old man appeared to be listening
attentively and as affectionately as his infirmities would allow to the
Abbé Busoni, who looked cold and calm, as usual. Villefort, perceiving
the abbé, passed his hand across his brow. The past came to him like
one of those waves whose wrath foams fiercer than the others.

He recollected the call he had made upon him after the dinner at
Auteuil, and then the visit the abbé had himself paid to his house on
the day of Valentine’s death.

“You here, sir!” he exclaimed; “do you, then, never appear but to act
as an escort to death?”

Busoni turned around, and, perceiving the excitement depicted on the
magistrate’s face, the savage lustre of his eyes, he understood that
the revelation had been made at the assizes; but beyond this he was
ignorant.

“I came to pray over the body of your daughter.”

“And now why are you here?”

“I come to tell you that you have sufficiently repaid your debt, and
that from this moment I will pray to God to forgive you, as I do.”

“Good heavens!” exclaimed Villefort, stepping back fearfully, “surely
that is not the voice of the Abbé Busoni!”

“No!” The abbé threw off his wig, shook his head, and his hair, no
longer confined, fell in black masses around his manly face.

“It is the face of the Count of Monte Cristo!” exclaimed the procureur,
with a haggard expression.

“You are not exactly right, M. Procureur; you must go farther back.”

“That voice, that voice!—where did I first hear it?”

“You heard it for the first time at Marseilles, twenty-three years ago,
the day of your marriage with Mademoiselle de Saint-Méran. Refer to
your papers.”

“You are not Busoni?—you are not Monte Cristo? Oh, heavens! you are,
then, some secret, implacable, and mortal enemy! I must have wronged
you in some way at Marseilles. Oh, woe to me!”

“Yes; you are now on the right path,” said the count, crossing his arms
over his broad chest; “search—search!”

“But what have I done to you?” exclaimed Villefort, whose mind was
balancing between reason and insanity, in that cloud which is neither a
dream nor reality; “what have I done to you? Tell me, then! Speak!”

“You condemned me to a horrible, tedious death; you killed my father;
you deprived me of liberty, of love, and happiness.”

“Who are you, then? Who are you?”

“I am the spectre of a wretch you buried in the dungeons of the Château
d’If. God gave that spectre the form of the Count of Monte Cristo when
he at length issued from his tomb, enriched him with gold and diamonds,
and led him to you!”

“Ah, I recognize you—I recognize you!” exclaimed the king’s attorney;
“you are——”

“I am Edmond Dantès!”

“You are Edmond Dantès,” cried Villefort, seizing the count by the
wrist; “then come here!”

And up the stairs he dragged Monte Cristo; who, ignorant of what had
happened, followed him in astonishment, foreseeing some new
catastrophe.

“There, Edmond Dantès!” he said, pointing to the bodies of his wife and
child, “see, are you well avenged?”

Monte Cristo became pale at this horrible sight; he felt that he had
passed beyond the bounds of vengeance, and that he could no longer say,
“God is for and with me.” With an expression of indescribable anguish
he threw himself upon the body of the child, reopened its eyes, felt
its pulse, and then rushed with him into Valentine’s room, of which he
double-locked the door.

“My child,” cried Villefort, “he carries away the body of my child! Oh,
curses, woe, death to you!”

He tried to follow Monte Cristo; but as though in a dream he was
transfixed to the spot,—his eyes glared as though they were starting
through the sockets; he griped the flesh on his chest until his nails
were stained with blood; the veins of his temples swelled and boiled as
though they would burst their narrow boundary, and deluge his brain
with living fire. This lasted several minutes, until the frightful
overturn of reason was accomplished; then uttering a loud cry followed
by a burst of laughter, he rushed down the stairs.

A quarter of an hour afterwards the door of Valentine’s room opened,
and Monte Cristo reappeared. Pale, with a dull eye and heavy heart, all
the noble features of that face, usually so calm and serene, were
overcast by grief. In his arms he held the child, whom no skill had
been able to recall to life. Bending on one knee, he placed it
reverently by the side of its mother, with its head upon her breast.
Then, rising, he went out, and meeting a servant on the stairs, he
asked:

“Where is M. de Villefort?”

The servant, instead of answering, pointed to the garden. Monte Cristo
ran down the steps, and advancing towards the spot designated beheld
Villefort, encircled by his servants, with a spade in his hand, and
digging the earth with fury.

“It is not here!” he cried. “It is not here!”

50197m



And then he moved farther on, and began again to dig.

Monte Cristo approached him, and said in a low voice, with an
expression almost humble:

“Sir, you have indeed lost a son; but——”

Villefort interrupted him; he had neither listened nor heard.

“Oh, I _will_ find it,” he cried; “you may pretend he is not here, but
I _will_ find him, though I dig forever!”

Monte Cristo drew back in horror.

“Oh,” he said, “he is mad!” And as though he feared that the walls of
the accursed house would crumble around him, he rushed into the street,
for the first time doubting whether he had the right to do as he had
done. “Oh, enough of this,—enough of this,” he cried; “let me save the
last.” On entering his house, he met Morrel, who wandered about like a
ghost awaiting the heavenly mandate for return to the tomb.

“Prepare yourself, Maximilian,” he said with a smile; “we leave Paris
tomorrow.”

“Have you nothing more to do there?” asked Morrel.

“No,” replied Monte Cristo; “God grant I may not have done too much
already.”

The next day they indeed left, accompanied only by Baptistin. Haydée
had taken away Ali, and Bertuccio remained with Noirtier.



 Chapter 112. The Departure

The recent events formed the theme of conversation throughout all
Paris. Emmanuel and his wife conversed with natural astonishment in
their little apartment in the Rue Meslay upon the three successive,
sudden, and most unexpected catastrophes of Morcerf, Danglars, and
Villefort. Maximilian, who was paying them a visit, listened to their
conversation, or rather was present at it, plunged in his accustomed
state of apathy.

“Indeed,” said Julie, “might we not almost fancy, Emmanuel, that those
people, so rich, so happy but yesterday, had forgotten in their
prosperity that an evil genius—like the wicked fairies in Perrault’s
stories who present themselves unbidden at a wedding or baptism—hovered
over them, and appeared all at once to revenge himself for their fatal
neglect?