For very important notes, for which closer attention is required, I
pricked one of my fingers, and wrote with my own blood.”

“And when,” asked Dantès, “may I see all this?”

“Whenever you please,” replied the abbé.

“Oh, then let it be directly!” exclaimed the young man.

“Follow me, then,” said the abbé, as he re-entered the subterranean
passage, in which he soon disappeared, followed by Dantès.



 Chapter 17. The Abbé’s Chamber

After having passed with tolerable ease through the subterranean
passage, which, however, did not admit of their holding themselves
erect, the two friends reached the further end of the corridor, into
which the abbé’s cell opened; from that point the passage became much
narrower, and barely permitted one to creep through on hands and knees.
The floor of the abbé’s cell was paved, and it had been by raising one
of the stones in the most obscure corner that Faria had been able to
commence the laborious task of which Dantès had witnessed the
completion.

As he entered the chamber of his friend, Dantès cast around one eager
and searching glance in quest of the expected marvels, but nothing more
than common met his view.

“It is well,” said the abbé; “we have some hours before us—it is now
just a quarter past twelve o’clock.” Instinctively Dantès turned round
to observe by what watch or clock the abbé had been able so accurately
to specify the hour.

“Look at this ray of light which enters by my window,” said the abbé,
“and then observe the lines traced on the wall. Well, by means of these
lines, which are in accordance with the double motion of the earth, and
the ellipse it describes round the sun, I am enabled to ascertain the
precise hour with more minuteness than if I possessed a watch; for that
might be broken or deranged in its movements, while the sun and earth
never vary in their appointed paths.”

This last explanation was wholly lost upon Dantès, who had always
imagined, from seeing the sun rise from behind the mountains and set in
the Mediterranean, that it moved, and not the earth. A double movement
of the globe he inhabited, and of which he could feel nothing, appeared
to him perfectly impossible. Each word that fell from his companion’s
lips seemed fraught with the mysteries of science, as worthy of digging
out as the gold and diamonds in the mines of Guzerat and Golconda,
which he could just recollect having visited during a voyage made in
his earliest youth.

“Come,” said he to the abbé, “I am anxious to see your treasures.”

The abbé smiled, and, proceeding to the disused fireplace, raised, by
the help of his chisel, a long stone, which had doubtless been the
hearth, beneath which was a cavity of considerable depth, serving as a
safe depository of the articles mentioned to Dantès.

0213m



“What do you wish to see first?” asked the abbé.

“Oh, your great work on the monarchy of Italy!”

Faria then drew forth from his hiding-place three or four rolls of
linen, laid one over the other, like folds of papyrus. These rolls
consisted of slips of cloth about four inches wide and eighteen long;
they were all carefully numbered and closely covered with writing, so
legible that Dantès could easily read it, as well as make out the
sense—it being in Italian, a language he, as a Provençal, perfectly
understood.

“There,” said he, “there is the work complete. I wrote the word _finis_
at the end of the sixty-eighth strip about a week ago. I have torn up
two of my shirts, and as many handkerchiefs as I was master of, to
complete the precious pages. Should I ever get out of prison and find
in all Italy a printer courageous enough to publish what I have
composed, my literary reputation is forever secured.”

“I see,” answered Dantès. “Now let me behold the curious pens with
which you have written your work.”

“Look!” said Faria, showing to the young man a slender stick about six
inches long, and much resembling the size of the handle of a fine
painting-brush, to the end of which was tied, by a piece of thread, one
of those cartilages of which the abbé had before spoken to Dantès; it
was pointed, and divided at the nib like an ordinary pen. Dantès
examined it with intense admiration, then looked around to see the
instrument with which it had been shaped so correctly into form.

“Ah, yes,” said Faria; “the penknife. That’s my masterpiece. I made it,
as well as this larger knife, out of an old iron candlestick.” The
penknife was sharp and keen as a razor; as for the other knife, it
would serve a double purpose, and with it one could cut and thrust.

Dantès examined the various articles shown to him with the same
attention that he had bestowed on the curiosities and strange tools
exhibited in the shops at Marseilles as the works of the savages in the
South Seas from whence they had been brought by the different trading
vessels.

“As for the ink,” said Faria, “I told you how I managed to obtain
that—and I only just make it from time to time, as I require it.”

“One thing still puzzles me,” observed Dantès, “and that is how you
managed to do all this by daylight?”

“I worked at night also,” replied Faria.

“Night!—why, for Heaven’s sake, are your eyes like cats’, that you can
see to work in the dark?”

“Indeed they are not; but God has supplied man with the intelligence
that enables him to overcome the limitations of natural conditions. I
furnished myself with a light.”

“You did? Pray tell me how.”

“I separated the fat from the meat served to me, melted it, and so made
oil—here is my lamp.” So saying, the abbé exhibited a sort of torch
very similar to those used in public illuminations.

“But how do you procure a light?”

“Oh, here are two flints and a piece of burnt linen.”

“And matches?”

“I pretended that I had a disorder of the skin, and asked for a little
sulphur, which was readily supplied.”

Dantès laid the different things he had been looking at on the table,
and stood with his head drooping on his breast, as though overwhelmed
by the perseverance and strength of Faria’s mind.

0215m



“You have not seen all yet,” continued Faria, “for I did not think it
wise to trust all my treasures in the same hiding-place. Let us shut
this one up.” They put the stone back in its place; the abbé sprinkled
a little dust over it to conceal the traces of its having been removed,
rubbed his foot well on it to make it assume the same appearance as the
other, and then, going towards his bed, he removed it from the spot it
stood in. Behind the head of the bed, and concealed by a stone fitting
in so closely as to defy all suspicion, was a hollow space, and in this
space a ladder of cords between twenty-five and thirty feet in length.
Dantès closely and eagerly examined it; he found it firm, solid, and
compact enough to bear any weight.

“Who supplied you with the materials for making this wonderful work?”

“I tore up several of my shirts, and ripped out the seams in the sheets
of my bed, during my three years’ imprisonment at Fenestrelle; and when
I was removed to the Château d’If, I managed to bring the ravellings
with me, so that I have been able to finish my work here.”

“And was it not discovered that your sheets were unhemmed?”

“Oh, no, for when I had taken out the thread I required, I hemmed the
edges over again.”

“With what?”

“With this needle,” said the abbé, as, opening his ragged vestments, he
showed Dantès a long, sharp fish-bone, with a small perforated eye for
the thread, a small portion of which still remained in it.

“I once thought,” continued Faria, “of removing these iron bars, and
letting myself down from the window, which, as you see, is somewhat
wider than yours, although I should have enlarged it still more
preparatory to my flight; however, I discovered that I should merely
have dropped into a sort of inner court, and I therefore renounced the
project altogether as too full of risk and danger. Nevertheless, I
carefully preserved my ladder against one of those unforeseen
opportunities of which I spoke just now, and which sudden chance
frequently brings about.”

While affecting to be deeply engaged in examining the ladder, the mind
of Dantès was, in fact, busily occupied by the idea that a person so
intelligent, ingenious, and clear-sighted as the abbé might probably be
able to solve the dark mystery of his own misfortunes, where he himself
could see nothing.

“What are you thinking of?” asked the abbé smilingly, imputing the deep
abstraction in which his visitor was plunged to the excess of his awe
and wonder.

“I was reflecting, in the first place,” replied Dantès, “upon the
enormous degree of intelligence and ability you must have employed to
reach the high perfection to which you have attained. What would you
not have accomplished if you had been free?”

“Possibly nothing at all; the overflow of my brain would probably, in a
state of freedom, have evaporated in a thousand follies; misfortune is
needed to bring to light the treasures of the human intellect.
Compression is needed to explode gunpowder. Captivity has brought my
mental faculties to a focus; and you are well aware that from the
collision of clouds electricity is produced—from electricity,
lightning, from lightning, illumination.”

“No,” replied Dantès. “I know nothing. Some of your words are to me
quite empty of meaning. You must be blessed indeed to possess the
knowledge you have.”

The abbé smiled. “Well,” said he, “but you had another subject for your
thoughts; did you not say so just now?”

“I did!”

“You have told me as yet but one of them—let me hear the other.”

“It was this,—that while you had related to me all the particulars of
your past life, you were perfectly unacquainted with mine.”

“Your life, my young friend, has not been of sufficient length to admit
of your having passed through any very important events.