”

As she spoke the goddess dispersed the mist and the land appeared. Then
Ulysses rejoiced at finding himself again in his own land, and kissed
the bounteous soil; he lifted up his hands and prayed to the nymphs,
saying, “Naiad nymphs, daughters of Jove, I made sure that I was never
again to see you, now therefore I greet you with all loving
salutations, and I will bring you offerings as in the old days, if
Jove’s redoubtable daughter will grant me life, and bring my son to
manhood.”

“Take heart, and do not trouble yourself about that,” rejoined Minerva,
“let us rather set about stowing your things at once in the cave, where
they will be quite safe. Let us see how we can best manage it all.”

Therewith she went down into the cave to look for the safest hiding
places, while Ulysses brought up all the treasure of gold, bronze, and
good clothing which the Phaeacians had given him. They stowed
everything carefully away, and Minerva set a stone against the door of
the cave. Then the two sat down by the root of the great olive, and
consulted how to compass the destruction of the wicked suitors.

“Ulysses,” said Minerva, “noble son of Laertes, think how you can lay
hands on these disreputable people who have been lording it in your
house these three years, courting your wife and making wedding presents
to her, while she does nothing but lament your absence, giving hope and
sending encouraging messages123 to every one of them, but meaning the
very opposite of all she says.”

And Ulysses answered, “In good truth, goddess, it seems I should have
come to much the same bad end in my own house as Agamemnon did, if you
had not given me such timely information. Advise me how I shall best
avenge myself. Stand by my side and put your courage into my heart as
on the day when we loosed Troy’s fair diadem from her brow. Help me now
as you did then, and I will fight three hundred men, if you, goddess,
will be with me.”

“Trust me for that,” said she, “I will not lose sight of you when once
we set about it, and I imagine that some of those who are devouring
your substance will then bespatter the pavement with their blood and
brains. I will begin by disguising you so that no human being shall
know you; I will cover your body with wrinkles; you shall lose all your
yellow hair; I will clothe you in a garment that shall fill all who see
it with loathing; I will blear your fine eyes for you, and make you an
unseemly object in the sight of the suitors, of your wife, and of the
son whom you left behind you. Then go at once to the swineherd who is
in charge of your pigs; he has been always well affected towards you,
and is devoted to Penelope and your son; you will find him feeding his
pigs near the rock that is called Raven124 by the fountain Arethusa,
where they are fattening on beechmast and spring water after their
manner. Stay with him and find out how things are going, while I
proceed to Sparta and see your son, who is with Menelaus at Lacedaemon,
where he has gone to try and find out whether you are still alive.”125

“But why,” said Ulysses, “did you not tell him, for you knew all about
it? Did you want him too to go sailing about amid all kinds of hardship
while others are eating up his estate?”

Minerva answered, “Never mind about him, I sent him that he might be
well spoken of for having gone. He is in no sort of difficulty, but is
staying quite comfortably with Menelaus, and is surrounded with
abundance of every kind. The suitors have put out to sea and are lying
in wait for him, for they mean to kill him before he can get home. I do
not much think they will succeed, but rather that some of those who are
now eating up your estate will first find a grave themselves.”

As she spoke Minerva touched him with her wand and covered him with
wrinkles, took away all his yellow hair, and withered the flesh over
his whole body; she bleared his eyes, which were naturally very fine
ones; she changed his clothes and threw an old rag of a wrap about him,
and a tunic, tattered, filthy, and begrimed with smoke; she also gave
him an undressed deer skin as an outer garment, and furnished him with
a staff and a wallet all in holes, with a twisted thong for him to
sling it over his shoulder.

When the pair had thus laid their plans they parted, and the goddess
went straight to Lacedaemon to fetch Telemachus.




BOOK XIV


ULYSSES IN THE HUT WITH EUMAEUS.


Ulysses now left the haven, and took the rough track up through the
wooded country and over the crest of the mountain till he reached the
place where Minerva had said that he would find the swineherd, who was
the most thrifty servant he had. He found him sitting in front of his
hut, which was by the yards that he had built on a site which could be
seen from far. He had made them spacious126 and fair to see, with a
free run for the pigs all round them; he had built them during his
master’s absence, of stones which he had gathered out of the ground,
without saying anything to Penelope or Laertes, and he had fenced them
on top with thorn bushes. Outside the yard he had run a strong fence of
oaken posts, split, and set pretty close together, while inside he had
built twelve styes near one another for the sows to lie in. There were
fifty pigs wallowing in each stye, all of them breeding sows; but the
boars slept outside and were much fewer in number, for the suitors kept
on eating them, and the swineherd had to send them the best he had
continually. There were three hundred and sixty boar pigs, and the
herdsman’s four hounds, which were as fierce as wolves, slept always
with them. The swineherd was at that moment cutting out a pair of
sandals127 from a good stout ox hide. Three of his men were out herding
the pigs in one place or another, and he had sent the fourth to town
with a boar that he had been forced to send the suitors that they might
sacrifice it and have their fill of meat.

When the hounds saw Ulysses they set up a furious barking and flew at
him, but Ulysses was cunning enough to sit down and loose his hold of
the stick that he had in his hand: still, he would have been torn by
them in his own homestead had not the swineherd dropped his ox hide,
rushed full speed through the gate of the yard and driven the dogs off
by shouting and throwing stones at them. Then he said to Ulysses, “Old
man, the dogs were likely to have made short work of you, and then you
would have got me into trouble. The gods have given me quite enough
worries without that, for I have lost the best of masters, and am in
continual grief on his account. I have to attend swine for other people
to eat, while he, if he yet lives to see the light of day, is starving
in some distant land. But come inside, and when you have had your fill
of bread and wine, tell me where you come from, and all about your
misfortunes.”

On this the swineherd led the way into the hut and bade him sit down.
He strewed a good thick bed of rushes upon the floor, and on the top of
this he threw the shaggy chamois skin—a great thick one—on which he
used to sleep by night. Ulysses was pleased at being made thus welcome,
and said “May Jove, sir, and the rest of the gods grant you your
heart’s desire in return for the kind way in which you have received
me.”

To this you answered, O swineherd Eumaeus, “Stranger, though a still
poorer man should come here, it would not be right for me to insult
him, for all strangers and beggars are from Jove. You must take what
you can get and be thankful, for servants live in fear when they have
young lords for their masters; and this is my misfortune now, for
heaven has hindered the return of him who would have been always good
to me and given me something of my own—a house, a piece of land, a good
looking wife, and all else that a liberal master allows a servant who
has worked hard for him, and whose labour the gods have prospered as
they have mine in the situation which I hold. If my master had grown
old here he would have done great things by me, but he is gone, and I
wish that Helen’s whole race were utterly destroyed, for she has been
the death of many a good man. It was this matter that took my master to
Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans in the cause of
king Agamemnon.”

As he spoke he bound his girdle round him and went to the styes where
the young sucking pigs were penned. He picked out two which he brought
back with him and sacrificed. He singed them, cut them up, and spitted
them; when the meat was cooked he brought it all in and set it before
Ulysses, hot and still on the spit, whereon Ulysses sprinkled it over
with white barley meal. The swineherd then mixed wine in a bowl of
ivy-wood, and taking a seat opposite Ulysses told him to begin.

“Fall to, stranger,” said he, “on a dish of servant’s pork. The fat
pigs have to go to the suitors, who eat them up without shame or
scruple; but the blessed gods love not such shameful doings, and
respect those who do what is lawful and right. Even the fierce
freebooters who go raiding on other people’s land, and Jove gives them
their spoil—even they, when they have filled their ships and got home
again live conscience-stricken, and look fearfully for judgement; but
some god seems to have told these people that Ulysses is dead and gone;
they will not, therefore, go back to their own homes and make their
offers of marriage in the usual way, but waste his estate by force,
without fear or stint. Not a day or night comes out of heaven, but they
sacrifice not one victim nor two only, and they take the run of his
wine, for he was exceedingly rich. No other great man either in Ithaca
or on the mainland is as rich as he was; he had as much as twenty men
put together. I will tell you what he had. There are twelve herds of
cattle upon the main land, and as many flocks of sheep, there are also
twelve droves of pigs, while his own men and hired strangers feed him
twelve widely spreading herds of goats.