You have got here
on foot quicker than I have with my ship.’

“‘Sir,’ he answered with a groan, ‘it was all bad luck, and my own
unspeakable drunkenness. I was lying asleep on the top of Circe’s
house, and never thought of coming down again by the great staircase
but fell right off the roof and broke my neck, so my soul came down to
the house of Hades. And now I beseech you by all those whom you have
left behind you, though they are not here, by your wife, by the father
who brought you up when you were a child, and by Telemachus who is the
one hope of your house, do what I shall now ask you. I know that when
you leave this limbo you will again hold your ship for the Aeaean
island. Do not go thence leaving me unwaked and unburied behind you, or
I may bring heaven’s anger upon you; but burn me with whatever armour I
have, build a barrow for me on the sea shore, that may tell people in
days to come what a poor unlucky fellow I was, and plant over my grave
the oar I used to row with when I was yet alive and with my messmates.’
And I said, ‘My poor fellow, I will do all that you have asked of me.’

“Thus, then, did we sit and hold sad talk with one another, I on the
one side of the trench with my sword held over the blood, and the ghost
of my comrade saying all this to me from the other side. Then came the
ghost of my dead mother Anticlea, daughter to Autolycus. I had left her
alive when I set out for Troy and was moved to tears when I saw her,
but even so, for all my sorrow I would not let her come near the blood
till I had asked my questions of Teiresias.

“Then came also the ghost of Theban Teiresias, with his golden sceptre
in his hand. He knew me and said, ‘Ulysses, noble son of Laertes, why,
poor man, have you left the light of day and come down to visit the
dead in this sad place? Stand back from the trench and withdraw your
sword that I may drink of the blood and answer your questions truly.’

“So I drew back, and sheathed my sword, whereon when he had drank of
the blood he began with his prophecy.

“‘You want to know,’ said he, ‘about your return home, but heaven will
make this hard for you. I do not think that you will escape the eye of
Neptune, who still nurses his bitter grudge against you for having
blinded his son. Still, after much suffering you may get home if you
can restrain yourself and your companions when your ship reaches the
Thrinacian island, where you will find the sheep and cattle belonging
to the sun, who sees and gives ear to everything. If you leave these
flocks unharmed and think of nothing but of getting home, you may yet
after much hardship reach Ithaca; but if you harm them, then I forewarn
you of the destruction both of your ship and of your men. Even though
you may yourself escape, you will return in bad plight after losing all
your men, [in another man’s ship, and you will find trouble in your
house, which will be overrun by high-handed people, who are devouring
your substance under the pretext of paying court and making presents to
your wife.

“‘When you get home you will take your revenge on these suitors; and
after you have killed them by force or fraud in your own house, you
must take a well made oar and carry it on and on, till you come to a
country where the people have never heard of the sea and do not even
mix salt with their food, nor do they know anything about ships, and
oars that are as the wings of a ship. I will give you this certain
token which cannot escape your notice. A wayfarer will meet you and
will say it must be a winnowing shovel that you have got upon your
shoulder; on this you must fix the oar in the ground and sacrifice a
ram, a bull, and a boar to Neptune.90 Then go home and offer hecatombs
to all the gods in heaven one after the other. As for yourself, death
shall come to you from the sea, and your life shall ebb away very
gently when you are full of years and peace of mind, and your people
shall bless you. All that I have said will come true].’91

“‘This,’ I answered, ‘must be as it may please heaven, but tell me and
tell me and tell me true, I see my poor mother’s ghost close by us; she
is sitting by the blood without saying a word, and though I am her own
son she does not remember me and speak to me; tell me, Sir, how I can
make her know me.’

“‘That,’ said he, ‘I can soon do. Any ghost that you let taste of the
blood will talk with you like a reasonable being, but if you do not let
them have any blood they will go away again.’

“On this the ghost of Teiresias went back to the house of Hades, for
his prophecyings had now been spoken, but I sat still where I was until
my mother came up and tasted the blood. Then she knew me at once and
spoke fondly to me, saying, ‘My son, how did you come down to this
abode of darkness while you are still alive? It is a hard thing for the
living to see these places, for between us and them there are great and
terrible waters, and there is Oceanus, which no man can cross on foot,
but he must have a good ship to take him. Are you all this time trying
to find your way home from Troy, and have you never yet got back to
Ithaca nor seen your wife in your own house?’

“‘Mother,’ said I, ‘I was forced to come here to consult the ghost of
the Theban prophet Teiresias. I have never yet been near the Achaean
land nor set foot on my native country, and I have had nothing but one
long series of misfortunes from the very first day that I set out with
Agamemnon for Ilius, the land of noble steeds, to fight the Trojans.
But tell me, and tell me true, in what way did you die? Did you have a
long illness, or did heaven vouchsafe you a gentle easy passage to
eternity? Tell me also about my father, and the son whom I left behind
me, is my property still in their hands, or has some one else got hold
of it, who thinks that I shall not return to claim it? Tell me again
what my wife intends doing, and in what mind she is; does she live with
my son and guard my estate securely, or has she made the best match she
could and married again?’

“My mother answered, ‘Your wife still remains in your house, but she is
in great distress of mind and spends her whole time in tears both night
and day. No one as yet has got possession of your fine property, and
Telemachus still holds your lands undisturbed. He has to entertain
largely, as of course he must, considering his position as a
magistrate,92 and how every one invites him; your father remains at his
old place in the country and never goes near the town. He has no
comfortable bed nor bedding; in the winter he sleeps on the floor in
front of the fire with the men and goes about all in rags, but in
summer, when the warm weather comes on again, he lies out in the
vineyard on a bed of vine leaves thrown any how upon the ground. He
grieves continually about your never having come home, and suffers more
and more as he grows older. As for my own end it was in this wise:
heaven did not take me swiftly and painlessly in my own house, nor was
I attacked by any illness such as those that generally wear people out
and kill them, but my longing to know what you were doing and the force
of my affection for you—this it was that was the death of me.’93

“Then I tried to find some way of embracing my poor mother’s ghost.
Thrice I sprang towards her and tried to clasp her in my arms, but each
time she flitted from my embrace as it were a dream or phantom, and
being touched to the quick I said to her, ‘Mother, why do you not stay
still when I would embrace you? If we could throw our arms around one
another we might find sad comfort in the sharing of our sorrows even in
the house of Hades; does Proserpine want to lay a still further load of
grief upon me by mocking me with a phantom only?’

“‘My son,’ she answered, ‘most ill-fated of all mankind, it is not
Proserpine that is beguiling you, but all people are like this when
they are dead. The sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together;
these perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has
left the body, and the soul flits away as though it were a dream. Now,
however, go back to the light of day as soon as you can, and note all
these things that you may tell them to your wife hereafter.’

“Thus did we converse, and anon Proserpine sent up the ghosts of the
wives and daughters of all the most famous men. They gathered in crowds
about the blood, and I considered how I might question them severally.
In the end I deemed that it would be best to draw the keen blade that
hung by my sturdy thigh, and keep them from all drinking the blood at
once. So they came up one after the other, and each one as I questioned
her told me her race and lineage.

“The first I saw was Tyro. She was daughter of Salmoneus and wife of
Cretheus the son of Aeolus.94 She fell in love with the river Enipeus
who is much the most beautiful river in the whole world. Once when she
was taking a walk by his side as usual, Neptune, disguised as her
lover, lay with her at the mouth of the river, and a huge blue wave
arched itself like a mountain over them to hide both woman and god,
whereon he loosed her virgin girdle and laid her in a deep slumber.
When the god had accomplished the deed of love, he took her hand in his
own and said, ‘Tyro, rejoice in all good will; the embraces of the gods
are not fruitless, and you will have fine twins about this time twelve
months. Take great care of them. I am Neptune, so now go home, but hold
your tongue and do not tell any one.’

“Then he dived under the sea, and she in due course bore Pelias and
Neleus, who both of them served Jove with all their might. Pelias was a
great breeder of sheep and lived in Iolcus, but the other lived in
Pylos. The rest of her children were by Cretheus, namely, Aeson,
Pheres, and Amythaon, who was a mighty warrior and charioteer.

“Next to her I saw Antiope, daughter to Asopus, who could boast of
having slept in the arms of even Jove himself, and who bore him two
sons Amphion and Zethus.