The mind
can see as well as the body. The body forgets sometimes; but the mind
always remembers.”

“And how far back into the past do your recollections extend?”

“I could scarcely walk when my mother, who was called Vasiliki, which
means royal,” said the young girl, tossing her head proudly, “took me
by the hand, and after putting in our purse all the money we possessed,
we went out, both covered with veils, to solicit alms for the
prisoners, saying, ‘He who giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord.’
Then when our purse was full we returned to the palace, and without
saying a word to my father, we sent it to the convent, where it was
divided amongst the prisoners.”

“And how old were you at that time?”

“I was three years old,” said Haydée.

“Then you remember everything that went on about you from the time when
you were three years old?” said Albert.

“Everything.”

“Count,” said Albert, in a low tone to Monte Cristo, “do allow the
signora to tell me something of her history. You prohibited my
mentioning my father’s name to her, but perhaps she will allude to him
of her own accord in the course of the recital, and you have no idea
how delighted I should be to hear our name pronounced by such beautiful
lips.”

Monte Cristo turned to Haydée, and with an expression of countenance
which commanded her to pay the most implicit attention to his words, he
said in Greek, “Πατρὸς μὲν ἄτην μήζε τὸ ὄνομα προδότου καὶ προδοσίαν
εἰπὲ ἡμῖν,”—that is, “Tell us the fate of your father; but neither the
name of the traitor nor the treason.” Haydée sighed deeply, and a shade
of sadness clouded her beautiful brow.

“What are you saying to her?” said Morcerf in an undertone.

“I again reminded her that you were a friend, and that she need not
conceal anything from you.”

“Then,” said Albert, “this pious pilgrimage in behalf of the prisoners
was your first remembrance; what is the next?”

“Oh, then I remember as if it were but yesterday sitting under the
shade of some sycamore-trees, on the borders of a lake, in the waters
of which the trembling foliage was reflected as in a mirror. Under the
oldest and thickest of these trees, reclining on cushions, sat my
father; my mother was at his feet, and I, childlike, amused myself by
playing with his long white beard which descended to his girdle, or
with the diamond-hilt of the scimitar attached to his girdle. Then from
time to time there came to him an Albanian who said something to which
I paid no attention, but which he always answered in the same tone of
voice, either ‘Kill,’ or ‘Pardon.’”

“It is very strange,” said Albert, “to hear such words proceed from the
mouth of anyone but an actress on the stage, and one needs constantly
to be saying to one’s self, ‘This is no fiction, it is all reality,’ in
order to believe it. And how does France appear in your eyes,
accustomed as they have been to gaze on such enchanted scenes?”

“I think it is a fine country,” said Haydée, “but I see France as it
really is, because I look on it with the eyes of a woman; whereas my
own country, which I can only judge of from the impression produced on
my childish mind, always seems enveloped in a vague atmosphere, which
is luminous or otherwise, according as my remembrances of it are sad or
joyous.”

“So young,” said Albert, forgetting at the moment the Count’s command
that he should ask no questions of the slave herself, “is it possible
that you can have known what suffering is except by name?”

Haydée turned her eyes towards Monte Cristo, who, making at the same
time some imperceptible sign, murmured:

“Εἰπέ—speak.”

“Nothing is ever so firmly impressed on the mind as the memory of our
early childhood, and with the exception of the two scenes I have just
described to you, all my earliest reminiscences are fraught with
deepest sadness.”

40068m



“Speak, speak, signora,” said Albert, “I am listening with the most
intense delight and interest to all you say.”

Haydée answered his remark with a melancholy smile. “You wish me, then,
to relate the history of my past sorrows?” said she.

“I beg you to do so,” replied Albert.

“Well, I was but four years old when one night I was suddenly awakened
by my mother. We were in the palace of Yanina; she snatched me from the
cushions on which I was sleeping, and on opening my eyes I saw hers
filled with tears. She took me away without speaking. When I saw her
weeping I began to cry too. ‘Hush, child!’ said she. At other times in
spite of maternal endearments or threats, I had with a child’s caprice
been accustomed to indulge my feelings of sorrow or anger by crying as
much as I felt inclined; but on this occasion there was an intonation
of such extreme terror in my mother’s voice when she enjoined me to
silence, that I ceased crying as soon as her command was given. She
bore me rapidly away.

“I saw then that we were descending a large staircase; around us were
all my mother’s servants carrying trunks, bags, ornaments, jewels,
purses of gold, with which they were hurrying away in the greatest
distraction.

“Behind the women came a guard of twenty men armed with long guns and
pistols, and dressed in the costume which the Greeks have assumed since
they have again become a nation. You may imagine there was something
startling and ominous,” said Haydée, shaking her head and turning pale
at the mere remembrance of the scene, “in this long file of slaves and
women only half-aroused from sleep, or at least so they appeared to me,
who was myself scarcely awake. Here and there on the walls of the
staircase, were reflected gigantic shadows, which trembled in the
flickering light of the pine-torches till they seemed to reach to the
vaulted roof above.

“‘Quick!’ said a voice at the end of the gallery. This voice made
everyone bow before it, resembling in its effect the wind passing over
a field of wheat, by its superior strength forcing every ear to yield
obeisance. As for me, it made me tremble. This voice was that of my
father. He came last, clothed in his splendid robes and holding in his
hand the carbine which your emperor presented him. He was leaning on
the shoulder of his favorite Selim, and he drove us all before him, as
a shepherd would his straggling flock. My father,” said Haydée, raising
her head, “was that illustrious man known in Europe under the name of
Ali Tepelini, pasha of Yanina, and before whom Turkey trembled.”

Albert, without knowing why, started on hearing these words pronounced
with such a haughty and dignified accent; it appeared to him as if
there was something supernaturally gloomy and terrible in the
expression which gleamed from the brilliant eyes of Haydée at this
moment; she appeared like a Pythoness evoking a spectre, as she
recalled to his mind the remembrance of the fearful death of this man,
to the news of which all Europe had listened with horror.

“Soon,” said Haydée, “we halted on our march, and found ourselves on
the borders of a lake. My mother pressed me to her throbbing heart, and
at the distance of a few paces I saw my father, who was glancing
anxiously around. Four marble steps led down to the water’s edge, and
below them was a boat floating on the tide.

40070m



“From where we stood I could see in the middle of the lake a large
blank mass; it was the kiosk to which we were going. This kiosk
appeared to me to be at a considerable distance, perhaps on account of
the darkness of the night, which prevented any object from being more
than partially discerned. We stepped into the boat. I remember well
that the oars made no noise whatever in striking the water, and when I
leaned over to ascertain the cause I saw that they were muffled with
the sashes of our Palikares.14 Besides the rowers, the boat contained
only the women, my father, mother, Selim, and myself. The Palikares had
remained on the shore of the lake, ready to cover our retreat; they
were kneeling on the lowest of the marble steps, and in that manner
intended making a rampart of the three others, in case of pursuit. Our
bark flew before the wind. ‘Why does the boat go so fast?’ asked I of
my mother.

“‘Silence, child! Hush, we are flying!’ I did not understand. Why
should my father fly?—he, the all-powerful—he, before whom others were
accustomed to fly—he, who had taken for his device,

‘They hate me; then they fear me!’


“It was, indeed, a flight which my father was trying to effect. I have
been told since that the garrison of the castle of Yanina, fatigued
with long service——”

Here Haydée cast a significant glance at Monte Cristo, whose eyes had
been riveted on her countenance during the whole course of her
narrative. The young girl then continued, speaking slowly, like a
person who is either inventing or suppressing some feature of the
history which he is relating.

“You were saying, signora,” said Albert, who was paying the most
implicit attention to the recital, “that the garrison of Yanina,
fatigued with long service——”

“Had treated with the Seraskier15 Kourchid, who had been sent by the
sultan to gain possession of the person of my father; it was then that
Ali Tepelini—after having sent to the sultan a French officer in whom
he reposed great confidence—resolved to retire to the asylum which he
had long before prepared for himself, and which he called
_kataphygion_, or the refuge.”

“And this officer,” asked Albert, “do you remember his name, signora?”

Monte Cristo exchanged a rapid glance with the young girl, which was
quite unperceived by Albert.

“No,” said she, “I do not remember it just at this moment; but if it
should occur to me presently, I will tell you.”

Albert was on the point of pronouncing his father’s name, when Monte
Cristo gently held up his finger in token of reproach; the young man
recollected his promise, and was silent.

“It was towards this kiosk that we were rowing.