”

Meanwhile Andrea and the two executioners were struggling on the
ground, and he kept exclaiming, “He ought to die!—he shall die!—I will
not die alone!”

“Look, look,” cried the count, seizing the young men’s hands; “look,
for on my soul it is curious. Here is a man who had resigned himself to
his fate, who was going to the scaffold to die—like a coward, it is
true, but he was about to die without resistance. Do you know what gave
him strength? do you know what consoled him? It was, that another
partook of his punishment—that another partook of his anguish—that
another was to die before him! Lead two sheep to the butcher’s, two
oxen to the slaughterhouse, and make one of them understand that his
companion will not die; the sheep will bleat for pleasure, the ox will
bellow with joy. But man—man, whom God created in his own image—man,
upon whom God has laid his first, his sole commandment, to love his
neighbor—man, to whom God has given a voice to express his
thoughts—what is his first cry when he hears his fellow-man is saved? A
blasphemy. Honor to man, this masterpiece of nature, this king of the
creation!”

And the count burst into a laugh; a terrible laugh, that showed he must
have suffered horribly to be able thus to laugh.

However, the struggle still continued, and it was dreadful to witness.
The two assistants carried Andrea up to the scaffold; the people all
took part against Andrea, and twenty thousand voices cried, “Put him to
death! put him to death!”

Franz sprang back, but the count seized his arm, and held him before
the window.

“What are you doing?” said he. “Do you pity him? If you heard the cry
of ‘Mad dog!’ you would take your gun—you would unhesitatingly shoot
the poor beast, who, after all, was only guilty of having been bitten
by another dog. And yet you pity a man who, without being bitten by one
of his race, has yet murdered his benefactor; and who, now unable to
kill anyone, because his hands are bound, wishes to see his companion
in captivity perish. No, no—look, look!”

20172m



The recommendation was needless. Franz was fascinated by the horrible
spectacle.

The two assistants had borne Andrea to the scaffold, and there, in
spite of his struggles, his bites, and his cries, had forced him to his
knees. During this time the executioner had raised his mace, and signed
to them to get out of the way; the criminal strove to rise, but, ere he
had time, the mace fell on his left temple. A dull and heavy sound was
heard, and the man dropped like an ox on his face, and then turned over
on his back.

The executioner let fall his mace, drew his knife, and with one stroke
opened his throat, and mounting on his stomach, stamped violently on it
with his feet. At every stroke a jet of blood sprang from the wound.

This time Franz could contain himself no longer, but sank, half
fainting, into a seat.

Albert, with his eyes closed, was standing grasping the
window-curtains.

The count was erect and triumphant, like the Avenging Angel!



 Chapter 36. The Carnival at Rome

When Franz recovered his senses, he saw Albert drinking a glass of
water, of which, to judge from his pallor, he stood in great need; and
the count, who was assuming his masquerade costume. He glanced
mechanically towards the piazza—the scene was wholly changed; scaffold,
executioners, victims, all had disappeared; only the people remained,
full of noise and excitement. The bell of Monte Citorio, which only
sounds on the pope’s decease and the opening of the Carnival, was
ringing a joyous peal.

“Well,” asked he of the count, “what has, then, happened?”

“Nothing,” replied the count; “only, as you see, the Carnival has
commenced. Make haste and dress yourself.”

“In fact,” said Franz, “this horrible scene has passed away like a
dream.”

“It is but a dream, a nightmare, that has disturbed you.”

“Yes, that I have suffered; but the culprit?”

“That is a dream also; only he has remained asleep, while you have
awakened; and who knows which of you is the most fortunate?”

“But Peppino—what has become of him?”

“Peppino is a lad of sense, who, unlike most men, who are happy in
proportion as they are noticed, was delighted to see that the general
attention was directed towards his companion. He profited by this
distraction to slip away among the crowd, without even thanking the
worthy priests who accompanied him. Decidedly man is an ungrateful and
egotistical animal. But dress yourself; see, M. de Morcerf sets you the
example.”

Albert was drawing on the satin pantaloon over his black trousers and
varnished boots.

“Well, Albert,” said Franz, “do you feel much inclined to join the
revels? Come, answer frankly.”

“_Ma foi_, no,” returned Albert. “But I am really glad to have seen
such a sight; and I understand what the count said—that when you have
once habituated yourself to a similar spectacle, it is the only one
that causes you any emotion.”

20175m



“Without reflecting that this is the only moment in which you can study
character,” said the count; “on the steps of the scaffold death tears
off the mask that has been worn through life, and the real visage is
disclosed. It must be allowed that Andrea was not very handsome, the
hideous scoundrel! Come, dress yourselves, gentlemen, dress
yourselves.”

Franz felt it would be ridiculous not to follow his two companions’
example. He assumed his costume, and fastened on the mask that scarcely
equalled the pallor of his own face. Their toilet finished, they
descended; the carriage awaited them at the door, filled with
sweetmeats and bouquets. They fell into the line of carriages.

It is difficult to form an idea of the perfect change that had taken
place. Instead of the spectacle of gloomy and silent death, the Piazza
del Popolo presented a spectacle of gay and noisy mirth and revelry. A
crowd of masks flowed in from all sides, emerging from the doors,
descending from the windows. From every street and every corner drove
carriages filled with clowns, harlequins, dominoes, mummers,
pantomimists, Transteverins, knights, and peasants, screaming,
fighting, gesticulating, throwing eggs filled with flour, confetti,
nosegays, attacking, with their sarcasms and their missiles, friends
and foes, companions and strangers, indiscriminately, and no one took
offence, or did anything but laugh.

Franz and Albert were like men who, to drive away a violent sorrow,
have recourse to wine, and who, as they drink and become intoxicated,
feel a thick veil drawn between the past and the present. They saw, or
rather continued to see, the image of what they had witnessed; but
little by little the general vertigo seized them, and they felt
themselves obliged to take part in the noise and confusion.

A handful of confetti that came from a neighboring carriage, and which,
while it covered Morcerf and his two companions with dust, pricked his
neck and that portion of his face uncovered by his mask like a hundred
pins, incited him to join in the general combat, in which all the masks
around him were engaged. He rose in his turn, and seizing handfuls of
confetti and sweetmeats, with which the carriage was filled, cast them
with all the force and skill he was master of.

20177m



The strife had fairly begun, and the recollection of what they had seen
half an hour before was gradually effaced from the young men’s minds,
so much were they occupied by the gay and glittering procession they
now beheld.

As for the Count of Monte Cristo, he had never for an instant shown any
appearance of having been moved. Imagine the large and splendid Corso,
bordered from one end to the other with lofty palaces, with their
balconies hung with carpets, and their windows with flags. At these
balconies are three hundred thousand spectators—Romans, Italians,
strangers from all parts of the world, the united aristocracy of birth,
wealth, and genius. Lovely women, yielding to the influence of the
scene, bend over their balconies, or lean from their windows, and
shower down confetti, which are returned by bouquets; the air seems
darkened with the falling confetti and flying flowers. In the streets
the lively crowd is dressed in the most fantastic costumes—gigantic
cabbages walk gravely about, buffaloes’ heads bellow from men’s
shoulders, dogs walk on their hind legs; in the midst of all this a
mask is lifted, and, as in Callot’s Temptation of St. Anthony, a lovely
face is exhibited, which we would fain follow, but from which we are
separated by troops of fiends. This will give a faint idea of the
Carnival at Rome.

At the second turn, the count stopped the carriage, and requested
permission to withdraw, leaving the vehicle at their disposal. Franz
looked up—they were opposite the Rospoli Palace. At the centre window,
the one hung with white damask with a red cross, was a blue domino,
beneath which Franz’s imagination easily pictured the beautiful Greek
of the Argentina.

“Gentlemen,” said the count, springing out, “when you are tired of
being actors, and wish to become spectators of this scene, you know you
have places at my windows. In the meantime, dispose of my coachman, my
carriage, and my servants.”

We have forgotten to mention, that the count’s coachman was attired in
a bear-skin, exactly resembling Odry’s in _The Bear and the Pasha_; and
the two footmen behind were dressed up as green monkeys, with spring
masks, with which they made grimaces at everyone who passed.

Franz thanked the count for his attention. As for Albert, he was busily
occupied throwing bouquets at a carriage full of Roman peasants that
was passing near him. Unfortunately for him, the line of carriages
moved on again, and while he descended the Piazza del Popolo, the other
ascended towards the Palazzo di Venezia.

“Ah, my dear fellow,” said he to Franz; “you did not see?