May I presume to ask whether you have long possessed it?”

“It has been in the family a very long while,” returned Monte Cristo,
“a sort of treasure expressly forbidden to be touched for a certain
period of years, during which the accumulated interest has doubled the
capital. The period appointed by the testator for the disposal of these
riches occurred only a short time ago, and they have only been employed
by me within the last few years. Your ignorance on the subject,
therefore, is easily accounted for. However, you will be better
informed as to me and my possessions ere long.”

And the count, while pronouncing these latter words, accompanied them
with one of those ghastly smiles that used to strike terror into poor
Franz d’Épinay.

“With your tastes, and means of gratifying them,” continued Danglars,
“you will exhibit a splendor that must effectually put us poor
miserable millionaires quite in the shade. If I mistake not you are an
admirer of paintings, at least I judged so from the attention you
appeared to be bestowing on mine when I entered the room. If you will
permit me, I shall be happy to show you my picture gallery, composed
entirely of works by the ancient masters—warranted as such. Not a
modern picture among them. I cannot endure the modern school of
painting.”

“You are perfectly right in objecting to them, for this one great
fault—that they have not yet had time to become old.”

“Or will you allow me to show you several fine statues by Thorwaldsen,
Bartoloni, and Canova?—all foreign artists, for, as you may perceive, I
think but very indifferently of our French sculptors.”

“You have a right to be unjust to them, monsieur; they are your
compatriots.”

“But all this may come later, when we shall be better known to each
other. For the present, I will confine myself (if perfectly agreeable
to you) to introducing you to the Baroness Danglars—excuse my
impatience, my dear count, but a client like you is almost like a
member of the family.”

Monte Cristo bowed, in sign that he accepted the proffered honor;
Danglars rang and was answered by a servant in a showy livery.

“Is the baroness at home?” inquired Danglars.

“Yes, my lord,” answered the man.

“And alone?”

“No, my lord, madame has visitors.”

“Have you any objection to meet any persons who may be with madame, or
do you desire to preserve a strict _incognito_?”

“No, indeed,” replied Monte Cristo with a smile, “I do not arrogate to
myself the right of so doing.”

“And who is with madame?—M. Debray?” inquired Danglars, with an air of
indulgence and good-nature that made Monte Cristo smile, acquainted as
he was with the secrets of the banker’s domestic life.

“Yes, my lord,” replied the servant, “M. Debray is with madame.”

Danglars nodded his head; then, turning to Monte Cristo, said, “M.
Lucien Debray is an old friend of ours, and private secretary to the
Minister of the Interior. As for my wife, I must tell you, she lowered
herself by marrying me, for she belongs to one of the most ancient
families in France. Her maiden name was De Servières, and her first
husband was Colonel the Marquis of Nargonne.”

“I have not the honor of knowing Madame Danglars; but I have already
met M. Lucien Debray.”

“Ah, indeed?” said Danglars; “and where was that?”

“At the house of M. de Morcerf.”

“Ah! you are acquainted with the young viscount, are you?”

“We were together a good deal during the Carnival at Rome.”

“True, true,” cried Danglars. “Let me see; have I not heard talk of
some strange adventure with bandits or thieves hid in ruins, and of his
having had a miraculous escape? I forget how, but I know he used to
amuse my wife and daughter by telling them about it after his return
from Italy.”

“Her ladyship is waiting to receive you, gentlemen,” said the servant,
who had gone to inquire the pleasure of his mistress.

“With your permission,” said Danglars, bowing, “I will precede you, to
show you the way.”

“By all means,” replied Monte Cristo; “I follow you.”



 Chapter 47. The Dappled Grays

The baron, followed by the count, traversed a long series of
apartments, in which the prevailing characteristics were heavy
magnificence and the gaudiness of ostentatious wealth, until he reached
the boudoir of Madame Danglars—a small octagonal-shaped room, hung with
pink satin, covered with white Indian muslin. The chairs were of
ancient workmanship and materials; over the doors were painted sketches
of shepherds and shepherdesses, after the style and manner of Boucher;
and at each side pretty medallions in crayons, harmonizing well with
the furnishings of this charming apartment, the only one throughout the
great mansion in which any distinctive taste prevailed. The truth was,
it had been entirely overlooked in the plan arranged and followed out
by M. Danglars and his architect, who had been selected to aid the
baron in the great work of improvement solely because he was the most
fashionable and celebrated decorator of the day. The decorations of the
boudoir had then been left entirely to Madame Danglars and Lucien
Debray. M. Danglars, however, while possessing a great admiration for
the antique, as it was understood during the time of the Directory,
entertained the most sovereign contempt for the simple elegance of his
wife’s favorite sitting-room, where, by the way, he was never permitted
to intrude, unless, indeed, he excused his own appearance by ushering
in some more agreeable visitor than himself; and even then he had
rather the air and manner of a person who was himself introduced, than
that of being the presenter of another, his reception being cordial or
frigid, in proportion as the person who accompanied him chanced to
please or displease the baroness.

Madame Danglars (who, although past the first bloom of youth, was still
strikingly handsome) was now seated at the piano, a most elaborate
piece of cabinet and inlaid work, while Lucien Debray, standing before
a small work-table, was turning over the pages of an album.

Lucien had found time, preparatory to the count’s arrival, to relate
many particulars respecting him to Madame Danglars. It will be
remembered that Monte Cristo had made a lively impression on the minds
of all the party assembled at the breakfast given by Albert de Morcerf;
and although Debray was not in the habit of yielding to such feelings,
he had never been able to shake off the powerful influence excited in
his mind by the impressive look and manner of the count, consequently
the description given by Lucien to the baroness bore the highly-colored
tinge of his own heated imagination. Already excited by the wonderful
stories related of the count by de Morcerf, it is no wonder that Madame
Danglars eagerly listened to, and fully credited, all the additional
circumstances detailed by Debray. This posing at the piano and over the
album was only a little ruse adopted by way of precaution. A most
gracious welcome and unusual smile were bestowed on M. Danglars; the
count, in return for his gentlemanly bow, received a formal though
graceful courtesy, while Lucien exchanged with the count a sort of
distant recognition, and with Danglars a free and easy nod.

“Baroness,” said Danglars, “give me leave to present to you the Count
of Monte Cristo, who has been most warmly recommended to me by my
correspondents at Rome. I need but mention one fact to make all the
ladies in Paris court his notice, and that is, that he has come to take
up his abode in Paris for a year, during which brief period he proposes
to spend six millions of money. That means balls, dinners, and lawn
parties without end, in all of which I trust the count will remember
us, as he may depend upon it we shall him, in our own humble
entertainments.”

In spite of the gross flattery and coarseness of this address, Madame
Danglars could not forbear gazing with considerable interest on a man
capable of expending six millions in twelve months, and who had
selected Paris for the scene of his princely extravagance.

“And when did you arrive here?” inquired she.

“Yesterday morning, madame.”

“Coming, as usual, I presume, from the extreme end of the globe? Pardon
me—at least, such I have heard is your custom.”

“Nay, madame. This time I have merely come from Cadiz.”

“You have selected a most unfavorable moment for your first visit.
Paris is a horrible place in summer. Balls, parties, and _fêtes_ are
over; the Italian opera is in London; the French opera everywhere
except in Paris. As for the Théatre Français, you know, of course, that
it is nowhere. The only amusements left us are the indifferent races at
the Champ-de-Mars and Satory. Do you propose entering any horses at
either of these races, count?”

“I shall do whatever they do at Paris, madame, if I have the good
fortune to find someone who will initiate me into the prevalent ideas
of amusement.”

“Are you fond of horses, count?”

“I have passed a considerable part of my life in the East, madame, and
you are doubtless aware that the Orientals value only two things—the
fine breeding of their horses and the beauty of their women.”

“Nay, count,” said the baroness, “it would have been somewhat more
gallant to have placed the ladies first.”

“You see, madame, how rightly I spoke when I said I required a
preceptor to guide me in all my sayings and doings here.”

At this instant the favorite attendant of Madame Danglars entered the
boudoir; approaching her mistress, she spoke some words in an
undertone. Madame Danglars turned very pale, then exclaimed:

“I cannot believe it; the thing is impossible.”

“I assure you, madame,” replied the woman, “it is as I have said.”

Turning impatiently towards her husband, Madame Danglars demanded, “Is
this true?”

“Is what true, madame?” inquired Danglars, visibly agitated.

“What my maid tells me.