The chief beauty of trees consists in the deep shadow of
their umbrageous boughs, while fancy pictures a moving multitude of
shapes and forms flitting and passing beneath that shade. Here I have a
garden laid out in such a way as to afford the fullest scope for the
imagination, and furnished with thickly grown trees, beneath whose
leafy screen a visionary like myself may conjure up phantoms at will.
This to me, who expected but to find a blank enclosure surrounded by a
straight wall, is, I assure you, a most agreeable surprise. I have no
fear of ghosts, and I have never heard it said that so much harm had
been done by the dead during six thousand years as is wrought by the
living in a single day. Retire within, Bertuccio, and tranquillize your
mind. Should your confessor be less indulgent to you in your dying
moments than you found the Abbé Busoni, send for me, if I am still on
earth, and I will soothe your ears with words that shall effectually
calm and soothe your parting soul ere it goes forth to traverse the
ocean called eternity.”

Bertuccio bowed respectfully, and turned away, sighing heavily. Monte
Cristo, left alone, took three or four steps onwards, and murmured:

“Here, beneath this plane-tree, must have been where the infant’s grave
was dug. There is the little door opening into the garden. At this
corner is the private staircase communicating with the sleeping
apartment. There will be no necessity for me to make a note of these
particulars, for there, before my eyes, beneath my feet, all around me,
I have the plan sketched with all the living reality of truth.”

After making the tour of the garden a second time, the count re-entered
his carriage, while Bertuccio, who perceived the thoughtful expression
of his master’s features, took his seat beside the driver without
uttering a word. The carriage proceeded rapidly towards Paris.

That same evening, upon reaching his abode in the Champs-Élysées, the
Count of Monte Cristo went over the whole building with the air of one
long acquainted with each nook or corner. Nor, although preceding the
party, did he once mistake one door for another, or commit the smallest
error when choosing any particular corridor or staircase to conduct him
to a place or suite of rooms he desired to visit. Ali was his principal
attendant during this nocturnal survey. Having given various orders to
Bertuccio relative to the improvements and alterations he desired to
make in the house, the Count, drawing out his watch, said to the
attentive Nubian:

“It is half-past eleven o’clock; Haydée will soon be here. Have the
French attendants been summoned to await her coming?”

Ali extended his hands towards the apartments destined for the fair
Greek, which were so effectually concealed by means of a tapestried
entrance, that it would have puzzled the most curious to have divined
their existence. Ali, having pointed to the apartments, held up three
fingers of his right hand, and then, placing it beneath his head, shut
his eyes, and feigned to sleep.

“I understand,” said Monte Cristo, well acquainted with Ali’s
pantomime; “you mean to tell me that three female attendants await
their new mistress in her sleeping-chamber.”

Ali, with considerable animation, made a sign in the affirmative.

“Madame will be tired tonight,” continued Monte Cristo, “and will, no
doubt, wish to rest. Desire the French attendants not to weary her with
questions, but merely to pay their respectful duty and retire. You will
also see that the Greek servants hold no communication with those of
this country.”

He bowed. Just at that moment voices were heard hailing the concierge.
The gate opened, a carriage rolled down the avenue, and stopped at the
steps. The count hastily descended, presented himself at the already
opened carriage door, and held out his hand to a young woman,
completely enveloped in a green silk mantle heavily embroidered with
gold. She raised the hand extended towards her to her lips, and kissed
it with a mixture of love and respect. Some few words passed between
them in that sonorous language in which Homer makes his gods converse.
The young woman spoke with an expression of deep tenderness, while the
count replied with an air of gentle gravity.

Preceded by Ali, who carried a rose-colored flambeau in his hand, the
young lady, who was no other than the lovely Greek who had been Monte
Cristo’s companion in Italy, was conducted to her apartments, while the
count retired to the pavilion reserved for himself. In another hour
every light in the house was extinguished, and it might have been
thought that all its inmates slept.



 Chapter 46. Unlimited Credit

About two o’clock the following day a calash, drawn by a pair of
magnificent English horses, stopped at the door of Monte Cristo and a
person, dressed in a blue coat, with buttons of a similar color, a
white waistcoat, over which was displayed a massive gold chain, brown
trousers, and a quantity of black hair descending so low over his
eyebrows as to leave it doubtful whether it were not artificial so
little did its jetty glossiness assimilate with the deep wrinkles
stamped on his features—a person, in a word, who, although evidently
past fifty, desired to be taken for not more than forty, bent forwards
from the carriage door, on the panels of which were emblazoned the
armorial bearings of a baron, and directed his groom to inquire at the
porter’s lodge whether the Count of Monte Cristo resided there, and if
he were within.

While waiting, the occupant of the carriage surveyed the house, the
garden as far as he could distinguish it, and the livery of servants
who passed to and fro, with an attention so close as to be somewhat
impertinent. His glance was keen but showed cunning rather than
intelligence; his lips were straight, and so thin that, as they closed,
they were drawn in over the teeth; his cheek-bones were broad and
projecting, a never-failing proof of audacity and craftiness; while the
flatness of his forehead, and the enlargement of the back of his skull,
which rose much higher than his large and coarsely shaped ears,
combined to form a physiognomy anything but prepossessing, save in the
eyes of such as considered that the owner of so splendid an equipage
must needs be all that was admirable and enviable, more especially when
they gazed on the enormous diamond that glittered in his shirt, and the
red ribbon that depended from his button-hole.

The groom, in obedience to his orders, tapped at the window of the
porter’s lodge, saying:

“Pray, does not the Count of Monte Cristo live here?”

“His excellency does reside here,” replied the concierge; “but——” added
he, glancing an inquiring look at Ali. Ali returned a sign in the
negative.

“But what?” asked the groom.

“His excellency does not receive visitors today.”

“Then here is my master’s card, the Baron Danglars. You will take it to
the count, and say that, although in haste to attend the Chamber, my
master came out of his way to have the honor of calling upon him.”

“I never speak to his excellency,” replied the concierge; “the valet de
chambre will carry your message.”

The groom returned to the carriage.

“Well?” asked Danglars.

The man, somewhat crest-fallen by the rebuke he had received, repeated
what the concierge had said.

“Bless me,” murmured Baron Danglars, “this must surely be a prince
instead of a count by their styling him ‘excellency,’ and only
venturing to address him by the medium of his valet de chambre.
However, it does not signify; he has a letter of credit on me, so I
must see him when he requires his money.”

Then, throwing himself back in his carriage, Danglars called out to his
coachman, in a voice that might be heard across the road, “To the
Chamber of Deputies.”

Apprised in time of the visit paid him, Monte Cristo had, from behind
the blinds of his pavilion, as minutely observed the baron, by means of
an excellent lorgnette, as Danglars himself had scrutinized the house,
garden, and servants.

“That fellow has a decidedly bad countenance,” said the count in a tone
of disgust, as he shut up his glass into its ivory case. “How comes it
that all do not retreat in aversion at sight of that flat, receding,
serpent-like forehead, round, vulture-shaped head, and sharp-hooked
nose, like the beak of a buzzard? Ali,” cried he, striking at the same
time on the brazen gong. Ali appeared. “Summon Bertuccio,” said the
count. Almost immediately Bertuccio entered the apartment.

“Did your excellency desire to see me?” inquired he.

“I did,” replied the count. “You no doubt observed the horses standing
a few minutes since at the door?”

“Certainly, your excellency. I noticed them for their remarkable
beauty.”

“Then how comes it,” said Monte Cristo with a frown, “that, when I
desired you to purchase for me the finest pair of horses to be found in
Paris, there is another pair, fully as fine as mine, not in my
stables?”

At the look of displeasure, added to the angry tone in which the count
spoke, Ali turned pale and held down his head.

“It is not your fault, my good Ali,” said the count in the Arabic
language, and with a gentleness none would have thought him capable of
showing, either in voice or face—“it is not your fault. You do not
understand the points of English horses.”

The countenance of poor Ali recovered its serenity.

“Permit me to assure your excellency,” said Bertuccio, “that the horses
you speak of were not to be sold when I purchased yours.”

Monte Cristo shrugged his shoulders. “It seems, sir steward,” said he,
“that you have yet to learn that all things are to be sold to such as
care to pay the price.”

“His excellency is not, perhaps, aware that M. Danglars gave 16,000
francs for his horses?”

“Very well. Then offer him double that sum; a banker never loses an
opportunity of doubling his capital.