”

“But did you not go upstairs and try to console the poor old man?”
asked the abbé.

“Ah, sir,” replied Caderousse, “we cannot console those who will not be
consoled, and he was one of these; besides, I know not why, but he
seemed to dislike seeing me. One night, however, I heard his sobs, and
I could not resist my desire to go up to him, but when I reached his
door he was no longer weeping but praying. I cannot now repeat to you,
sir, all the eloquent words and imploring language he made use of; it
was more than piety, it was more than grief, and I, who am no canter,
and hate the Jesuits, said then to myself, ‘It is really well, and I am
very glad that I have not any children; for if I were a father and felt
such excessive grief as the old man does, and did not find in my memory
or heart all he is now saying, I should throw myself into the sea at
once, for I could not bear it.’”

“Poor father!” murmured the priest.

“From day to day he lived on alone, and more and more solitary. M.
Morrel and Mercédès came to see him, but his door was closed; and,
although I was certain he was at home, he would not make any answer.
One day, when, contrary to his custom, he had admitted Mercédès, and
the poor girl, in spite of her own grief and despair, endeavored to
console him, he said to her,—‘Be assured, my dear daughter, he is dead;
and instead of expecting him, it is he who is awaiting us; I am quite
happy, for I am the oldest, and of course shall see him first.’

“However well disposed a person may be, why, you see we leave off after
a time seeing persons who are in sorrow, they make one melancholy; and
so at last old Dantès was left all to himself, and I only saw from time
to time strangers go up to him and come down again with some bundle
they tried to hide; but I guessed what these bundles were, and that he
sold by degrees what he had to pay for his subsistence. At length the
poor old fellow reached the end of all he had; he owed three quarters’
rent, and they threatened to turn him out; he begged for another week,
which was granted to him. I know this, because the landlord came into
my apartment when he left his.

“For the first three days I heard him walking about as usual, but, on
the fourth I heard nothing. I then resolved to go up to him at all
risks. The door was closed, but I looked through the keyhole, and saw
him so pale and haggard, that believing him very ill, I went and told
M. Morrel and then ran on to Mercédès. They both came immediately, M.
Morrel bringing a doctor, and the doctor said it was inflammation of
the bowels, and ordered him a limited diet. I was there, too, and I
never shall forget the old man’s smile at this prescription.

“From that time he received all who came; he had an excuse for not
eating any more; the doctor had put him on a diet.”

The abbé uttered a kind of groan.

“The story interests you, does it not, sir?” inquired Caderousse.

“Yes,” replied the abbé, “it is very affecting.”

“Mercédès came again, and she found him so altered that she was even
more anxious than before to have him taken to her own home. This was M.
Morrel’s wish also, who would fain have conveyed the old man against
his consent; but the old man resisted, and cried so that they were
actually frightened. Mercédès remained, therefore, by his bedside, and
M. Morrel went away, making a sign to the Catalan that he had left his
purse on the chimney-piece; but, availing himself of the doctor’s
order, the old man would not take any sustenance; at length (after nine
days of despair and fasting), the old man died, cursing those who had
caused his misery, and saying to Mercédès, ‘If you ever see my Edmond
again, tell him I die blessing him.’”

The abbé rose from his chair, made two turns round the chamber, and
pressed his trembling hand against his parched throat.

“And you believe he died——”

“Of hunger, sir, of hunger,” said Caderousse. “I am as certain of it as
that we two are Christians.”

The abbé, with a shaking hand, seized a glass of water that was
standing by him half-full, swallowed it at one gulp, and then resumed
his seat, with red eyes and pale cheeks.

“This was, indeed, a horrid event,” said he in a hoarse voice.

“The more so, sir, as it was men’s and not God’s doing.”

“Tell me of those men,” said the abbé, “and remember too,” he added in
an almost menacing tone, “you have promised to tell me everything. Tell
me, therefore, who are these men who killed the son with despair, and
the father with famine?”

“Two men jealous of him, sir; one from love, and the other from
ambition,—Fernand and Danglars.”

“How was this jealousy manifested? Speak on.”

“They denounced Edmond as a Bonapartist agent.”

“Which of the two denounced him? Which was the real delinquent?”

“Both, sir; one with a letter, and the other put it in the post.”

“And where was this letter written?”

“At La Réserve, the day before the betrothal feast.”

“’Twas so, then—’twas so, then,” murmured the abbé. “Oh, Faria, Faria,
how well did you judge men and things!”

“What did you please to say, sir?” asked Caderousse.

“Nothing, nothing,” replied the priest; “go on.”

“It was Danglars who wrote the denunciation with his left hand, that
his writing might not be recognized, and Fernand who put it in the
post.”

“But,” exclaimed the abbé suddenly, “you were there yourself.”

“I!” said Caderousse, astonished; “who told you I was there?”

The abbé saw he had overshot the mark, and he added quickly,—“No one;
but in order to have known everything so well, you must have been an
eye-witness.”

“True, true!” said Caderousse in a choking voice, “I was there.”

“And did you not remonstrate against such infamy?” asked the abbé; “if
not, you were an accomplice.”

“Sir,” replied Caderousse, “they had made me drink to such an excess
that I nearly lost all perception. I had only an indistinct
understanding of what was passing around me. I said all that a man in
such a state could say; but they both assured me that it was a jest
they were carrying on, and perfectly harmless.”

“Next day—next day, sir, you must have seen plain enough what they had
been doing, yet you said nothing, though you were present when Dantès
was arrested.”

“Yes, sir, I was there, and very anxious to speak; but Danglars
restrained me. ‘If he should really be guilty,’ said he, ‘and did
really put in to the Island of Elba; if he is really charged with a
letter for the Bonapartist committee at Paris, and if they find this
letter upon him, those who have supported him will pass for his
accomplices.’ I confess I had my fears, in the state in which politics
then were, and I held my tongue. It was cowardly, I confess, but it was
not criminal.”

0341m



“I understand—you allowed matters to take their course, that was all.”

“Yes, sir,” answered Caderousse; “and remorse preys on me night and
day. I often ask pardon of God, I swear to you, because this action,
the only one with which I have seriously to reproach myself in all my
life, is no doubt the cause of my abject condition. I am expiating a
moment of selfishness, and so I always say to La Carconte, when she
complains, ‘Hold your tongue, woman; it is the will of God.’” And
Caderousse bowed his head with every sign of real repentance.

“Well, sir,” said the abbé, “you have spoken unreservedly; and thus to
accuse yourself is to deserve pardon.”

“Unfortunately, Edmond is dead, and has not pardoned me.”

“He did not know,” said the abbé.

“But he knows it all now,” interrupted Caderousse; “they say the dead
know everything.”

There was a brief silence; the abbé rose and paced up and down
pensively, and then resumed his seat.

“You have two or three times mentioned a M. Morrel,” he said; “who was
he?”

“The owner of the _Pharaon_ and patron of Dantès.”

“And what part did he play in this sad drama?” inquired the abbé.

“The part of an honest man, full of courage and real regard. Twenty
times he interceded for Edmond. When the emperor returned, he wrote,
implored, threatened, and so energetically, that on the second
restoration he was persecuted as a Bonapartist. Ten times, as I told
you, he came to see Dantès’ father, and offered to receive him in his
own house; and the night or two before his death, as I have already
said, he left his purse on the mantelpiece, with which they paid the
old man’s debts, and buried him decently; and so Edmond’s father died,
as he had lived, without doing harm to anyone. I have the purse still
by me—a large one, made of red silk.”

“And,” asked the abbé, “is M. Morrel still alive?”

“Yes,” replied Caderousse.

“In that case,” replied the abbé, “he should be a man blessed of God,
rich, happy.”

Caderousse smiled bitterly. “Yes, happy as myself,” said he.

“What! M. Morrel unhappy?” exclaimed the abbé.

“He is reduced almost to the last extremity—nay, he is almost at the
point of dishonor.”

“How?”

“Yes,” continued Caderousse, “so it is; after five-and-twenty years of
labor, after having acquired a most honorable name in the trade of
Marseilles, M. Morrel is utterly ruined; he has lost five ships in two
years, has suffered by the bankruptcy of three large houses, and his
only hope now is in that very _Pharaon_ which poor Dantès commanded,
and which is expected from the Indies with a cargo of cochineal and
indigo. If this ship founders, like the others, he is a ruined man.”

“And has the unfortunate man wife or children?” inquired the abbé.

“Yes, he has a wife, who through everything has behaved like an angel;
he has a daughter, who was about to marry the man she loved, but whose
family now will not allow him to wed the daughter of a ruined man; he
has, besides, a son, a lieutenant in the army; and, as you may suppose,
all this, instead of lessening, only augments his sorrows. If he were
alone in the world he would blow out his brains, and there would be an
end.