’”

50035m



“Well,” said Eugénie cheerfully, “we have then only to pack up our
trunks; we shall start the evening of the signing of the contract,
instead of the evening of the wedding—that is all.”

“But consider the matter seriously, Eugénie!”

“Oh, I am done with considering! I am tired of hearing only of market
reports, of the end of the month, of the rise and fall of Spanish
funds, of Haitian bonds. Instead of that, Louise—do you
understand?—air, liberty, melody of birds, plains of Lombardy, Venetian
canals, Roman palaces, the Bay of Naples. How much have we, Louise?”

The young girl to whom this question was addressed drew from an inlaid
secretaire a small portfolio with a lock, in which she counted
twenty-three bank-notes.

“Twenty-three thousand francs,” said she.

“And as much, at least, in pearls, diamonds, and jewels,” said Eugénie.
“We are rich. With forty-five thousand francs we can live like
princesses for two years, and comfortably for four; but before six
months—you with your music, and I with my voice—we shall double our
capital. Come, you shall take charge of the money, I of the jewel-box;
so that if one of us had the misfortune to lose her treasure, the other
would still have hers left. Now, the portmanteau—let us make haste—the
portmanteau!”

“Stop!” said Louise, going to listen at Madame Danglars’ door.

“What do you fear?”

“That we may be discovered.”

“The door is locked.”

“They may tell us to open it.”

“They may if they like, but we will not.”

“You are a perfect Amazon, Eugénie!” And the two young girls began to
heap into a trunk all the things they thought they should require.

“There now,” said Eugénie, “while I change my costume do you lock the
portmanteau.” Louise pressed with all the strength of her little hands
on the top of the portmanteau.

“But I cannot,” said she; “I am not strong enough; do you shut it.”

“Ah, you do well to ask,” said Eugénie, laughing; “I forgot that I was
Hercules, and you only the pale Omphale!”

And the young girl, kneeling on the top, pressed the two parts of the
portmanteau together, and Mademoiselle d’Armilly passed the bolt of the
padlock through. When this was done, Eugénie opened a drawer, of which
she kept the key, and took from it a wadded violet silk travelling
cloak.

“Here,” said she, “you see I have thought of everything; with this
cloak you will not be cold.”

“But you?”

“Oh, I am never cold, you know! Besides, with these men’s clothes——”

“Will you dress here?”

“Certainly.”

“Shall you have time?”

“Do not be uneasy, you little coward! All our servants are busy,
discussing the grand affair. Besides, what is there astonishing, when
you think of the grief I ought to be in, that I shut myself up?—tell
me!”

“No, truly—you comfort me.”

“Come and help me.”

From the same drawer she took a man’s complete costume, from the boots
to the coat, and a provision of linen, where there was nothing
superfluous, but every requisite. Then, with a promptitude which
indicated that this was not the first time she had amused herself by
adopting the garb of the opposite sex, Eugénie drew on the boots and
pantaloons, tied her cravat, buttoned her waistcoat up to the throat,
and put on a coat which admirably fitted her beautiful figure.

“Oh, that is very good—indeed, it is very good!” said Louise, looking
at her with admiration; “but that beautiful black hair, those
magnificent braids, which made all the ladies sigh with envy,—will they
go under a man’s hat like the one I see down there?”

“You shall see,” said Eugénie. And with her left hand seizing the thick
mass, which her long fingers could scarcely grasp, she took in her
right hand a pair of long scissors, and soon the steel met through the
rich and splendid hair, which fell in a cluster at her feet as she
leaned back to keep it from her coat. Then she grasped the front hair,
which she also cut off, without expressing the least regret; on the
contrary, her eyes sparkled with greater pleasure than usual under her
ebony eyebrows.

50039m



“Oh, the magnificent hair!” said Louise, with regret.

“And am I not a hundred times better thus?” cried Eugénie, smoothing
the scattered curls of her hair, which had now quite a masculine
appearance; “and do you not think me handsomer so?”

“Oh, you are beautiful—always beautiful!” cried Louise. “Now, where are
you going?”

“To Brussels, if you like; it is the nearest frontier. We can go to
Brussels, Liège, Aix-la-Chapelle; then up the Rhine to Strasbourg. We
will cross Switzerland, and go down into Italy by the Saint-Gothard.
Will that do?”

“Yes.”

“What are you looking at?”

“I am looking at you; indeed you are adorable like that! One would say
you were carrying me off.”

“And they would be right, _pardieu!_”

“Oh, I think you swore, Eugénie.”

And the two young girls, whom everyone might have thought plunged in
grief, the one on her own account, the other from interest in her
friend, burst out laughing, as they cleared away every visible trace of
the disorder which had naturally accompanied the preparations for their
escape. Then, having blown out the lights, the two fugitives, looking
and listening eagerly, with outstretched necks, opened the door of a
dressing-room which led by a side staircase down to the yard,—Eugénie
going first, and holding with one arm the portmanteau, which by the
opposite handle Mademoiselle d’Armilly scarcely raised with both hands.
The yard was empty; the clock was striking twelve. The porter was not
yet gone to bed. Eugénie approached softly, and saw the old man
sleeping soundly in an armchair in his lodge. She returned to Louise,
took up the portmanteau, which she had placed for a moment on the
ground, and they reached the archway under the shadow of the wall.

Eugénie concealed Louise in an angle of the gateway, so that if the
porter chanced to awake he might see but one person. Then placing
herself in the full light of the lamp which lit the yard:

“Gate!” cried she, with her finest contralto voice, and rapping at the
window.

The porter got up as Eugénie expected, and even advanced some steps to
recognize the person who was going out, but seeing a young man striking
his boot impatiently with his riding-whip, he opened it immediately.
Louise slid through the half-open gate like a snake, and bounded
lightly forward. Eugénie, apparently calm, although in all probability
her heart beat somewhat faster than usual, went out in her turn.

A porter was passing and they gave him the portmanteau; then the two
young girls, having told him to take it to No. 36, Rue de la Victoire,
walked behind this man, whose presence comforted Louise. As for
Eugénie, she was as strong as a Judith or a Delilah. They arrived at
the appointed spot. Eugénie ordered the porter to put down the
portmanteau, gave him some pieces of money, and having rapped at the
shutter sent him away. The shutter where Eugénie had rapped was that of
a little laundress, who had been previously warned, and was not yet
gone to bed. She opened the door.

“Mademoiselle,” said Eugénie, “let the porter get the post-chaise from
the coach-house, and fetch some post-horses from the hotel. Here are
five francs for his trouble.”

“Indeed,” said Louise, “I admire you, and I could almost say respect
you.” The laundress looked on in astonishment, but as she had been
promised twenty louis, she made no remark.

In a quarter of an hour the porter returned with a post-boy and horses,
which were harnessed, and put in the post-chaise in a minute, while the
porter fastened the portmanteau on with the assistance of a cord and
strap.

“Here is the passport,” said the postilion, “which way are we going,
young gentleman?”

“To Fontainebleau,” replied Eugénie with an almost masculine voice.

“What do you say?” said Louise.

“I am giving them the slip,” said Eugénie; “this woman to whom we have
given twenty louis may betray us for forty; we will soon alter our
direction.”

And the young girl jumped into the britzka, which was admirably
arranged for sleeping in, without scarcely touching the step.

“You are always right,” said the music teacher, seating herself by the
side of her friend.

A quarter of an hour afterwards the postilion, having been put in the
right road, passed with a crack of his whip through the gateway of the
Barrière Saint-Martin.

“Ah,” said Louise, breathing freely, “here we are out of Paris.”

“Yes, my dear, the abduction is an accomplished fact,” replied Eugénie.

“Yes, and without violence,” said Louise.

“I shall bring that forward as an extenuating circumstance,” replied
Eugénie.

These words were lost in the noise which the carriage made in rolling
over the pavement of La Villette. M. Danglars no longer had a daughter.



 Chapter 98. The Bell and Bottle Tavern

And now let us leave Mademoiselle Danglars and her friend pursuing
their way to Brussels, and return to poor Andrea Cavalcanti, so
inopportunely interrupted in his rise to fortune. Notwithstanding his
youth, Master Andrea was a very skilful and intelligent boy. We have
seen that on the first rumor which reached the salon he had gradually
approached the door, and crossing two or three rooms at last
disappeared. But we have forgotten to mention one circumstance, which
nevertheless ought not to be omitted; in one of the rooms he crossed,
the _trousseau_ of the bride-elect was on exhibition. There were
caskets of diamonds, cashmere shawls, Valenciennes lace, English veils,
and in fact all the tempting things, the bare mention of which makes
the hearts of young girls bound with joy, and which is called the
_corbeille_.22 Now, in passing through this room, Andrea proved himself
not only to be clever and intelligent, but also provident, for he
helped himself to the most valuable of the ornaments before him.