Nineteen years of light to reflect upon in eternal darkness!
No distraction could come to his aid; his energetic spirit, that would
have exalted in thus revisiting the past, was imprisoned like an eagle
in a cage. He clung to one idea—that of his happiness, destroyed,
without apparent cause, by an unheard-of fatality; he considered and
reconsidered this idea, devoured it (so to speak), as the implacable
Ugolino devours the skull of Archbishop Roger in the Inferno of Dante.

Rage supplanted religious fervor. Dantès uttered blasphemies that made
his jailer recoil with horror, dashed himself furiously against the
walls of his prison, wreaked his anger upon everything, and chiefly
upon himself, so that the least thing,—a grain of sand, a straw, or a
breath of air that annoyed him, led to paroxysms of fury. Then the
letter that Villefort had showed to him recurred to his mind, and every
line gleamed forth in fiery letters on the wall like the _mene, mene,
tekel upharsin_ of Belshazzar. He told himself that it was the enmity
of man, and not the vengeance of Heaven, that had thus plunged him into
the deepest misery. He consigned his unknown persecutors to the most
horrible tortures he could imagine, and found them all insufficient,
because after torture came death, and after death, if not repose, at
least the boon of unconsciousness.

By dint of constantly dwelling on the idea that tranquillity was death,
and if punishment were the end in view other tortures than death must
be invented, he began to reflect on suicide. Unhappy he, who, on the
brink of misfortune, broods over ideas like these!

Before him is a dead sea that stretches in azure calm before the eye;
but he who unwarily ventures within its embrace finds himself
struggling with a monster that would drag him down to perdition. Once
thus ensnared, unless the protecting hand of God snatch him thence, all
is over, and his struggles but tend to hasten his destruction. This
state of mental anguish is, however, less terrible than the sufferings
that precede or the punishment that possibly will follow. There is a
sort of consolation at the contemplation of the yawning abyss, at the
bottom of which lie darkness and obscurity.

Edmond found some solace in these ideas. All his sorrows, all his
sufferings, with their train of gloomy spectres, fled from his cell
when the angel of death seemed about to enter. Dantès reviewed his past
life with composure, and, looking forward with terror to his future
existence, chose that middle line that seemed to afford him a refuge.

“Sometimes,” said he, “in my voyages, when I was a man and commanded
other men, I have seen the heavens overcast, the sea rage and foam, the
storm arise, and, like a monstrous bird, beating the two horizons with
its wings. Then I felt that my vessel was a vain refuge, that trembled
and shook before the tempest. Soon the fury of the waves and the sight
of the sharp rocks announced the approach of death, and death then
terrified me, and I used all my skill and intelligence as a man and a
sailor to struggle against the wrath of God. But I did so because I was
happy, because I had not courted death, because to be cast upon a bed
of rocks and seaweed seemed terrible, because I was unwilling that I, a
creature made for the service of God, should serve for food to the
gulls and ravens. But now it is different; I have lost all that bound
me to life, death smiles and invites me to repose; I die after my own
manner, I die exhausted and broken-spirited, as I fall asleep when I
have paced three thousand times round my cell,—that is thirty thousand
steps, or about ten leagues.”

No sooner had this idea taken possession of him than he became more
composed, arranged his couch to the best of his power, ate little and
slept less, and found existence almost supportable, because he felt
that he could throw it off at pleasure, like a worn-out garment. Two
methods of self-destruction were at his disposal. He could hang himself
with his handkerchief to the window bars, or refuse food and die of
starvation. But the first was repugnant to him. Dantès had always
entertained the greatest horror of pirates, who are hung up to the
yard-arm; he would not die by what seemed an infamous death. He
resolved to adopt the second, and began that day to carry out his
resolve.

0185m



Nearly four years had passed away; at the end of the second he had
ceased to mark the lapse of time. Dantès said, “I wish to die,” and had
chosen the manner of his death, and fearful of changing his mind, he
had taken an oath to die. “When my morning and evening meals are
brought,” thought he, “I will cast them out of the window, and they
will think that I have eaten them.”

He kept his word; twice a day he cast out, through the barred aperture,
the provisions his jailer brought him—at first gayly, then with
deliberation, and at last with regret. Nothing but the recollection of
his oath gave him strength to proceed. Hunger made viands once
repugnant, now acceptable; he held the plate in his hand for an hour at
a time, and gazed thoughtfully at the morsel of bad meat, of tainted
fish, of black and mouldy bread. It was the last yearning for life
contending with the resolution of despair; then his dungeon seemed less
sombre, his prospects less desperate. He was still young—he was only
four or five-and-twenty—he had nearly fifty years to live. What
unforseen events might not open his prison door, and restore him to
liberty? Then he raised to his lips the repast that, like a voluntary
Tantalus, he refused himself; but he thought of his oath, and he would
not break it. He persisted until, at last, he had not sufficient
strength to rise and cast his supper out of the loophole. The next
morning he could not see or hear; the jailer feared he was dangerously
ill. Edmond hoped he was dying.

Thus the day passed away. Edmond felt a sort of stupor creeping over
him which brought with it a feeling almost of content; the gnawing pain
at his stomach had ceased; his thirst had abated; when he closed his
eyes he saw myriads of lights dancing before them like the
will-o’-the-wisps that play about the marshes. It was the twilight of
that mysterious country called Death!

Suddenly, about nine o’clock in the evening, Edmond heard a hollow
sound in the wall against which he was lying.

So many loathsome animals inhabited the prison, that their noise did
not, in general, awake him; but whether abstinence had quickened his
faculties, or whether the noise was really louder than usual, Edmond
raised his head and listened. It was a continual scratching, as if made
by a huge claw, a powerful tooth, or some iron instrument attacking the
stones.

Although weakened, the young man’s brain instantly responded to the
idea that haunts all prisoners—liberty! It seemed to him that heaven
had at length taken pity on him, and had sent this noise to warn him on
the very brink of the abyss. Perhaps one of those beloved ones he had
so often thought of was thinking of him, and striving to diminish the
distance that separated them.

No, no, doubtless he was deceived, and it was but one of those dreams
that forerun death!

Edmond still heard the sound. It lasted nearly three hours; he then
heard a noise of something falling, and all was silent.

Some hours afterwards it began again, nearer and more distinct. Edmond
was intensely interested. Suddenly the jailer entered.

For a week since he had resolved to die, and during the four days that
he had been carrying out his purpose, Edmond had not spoken to the
attendant, had not answered him when he inquired what was the matter
with him, and turned his face to the wall when he looked too curiously
at him; but now the jailer might hear the noise and put an end to it,
and so destroy a ray of something like hope that soothed his last
moments.

The jailer brought him his breakfast. Dantès raised himself up and
began to talk about everything; about the bad quality of the food,
about the coldness of his dungeon, grumbling and complaining, in order
to have an excuse for speaking louder, and wearying the patience of his
jailer, who out of kindness of heart had brought broth and white bread
for his prisoner.

Fortunately, he fancied that Dantès was delirious; and placing the food
on the rickety table, he withdrew. Edmond listened, and the sound
became more and more distinct.

“There can be no doubt about it,” thought he; “it is some prisoner who
is striving to obtain his freedom. Oh, if I were only there to help
him!”

Suddenly another idea took possession of his mind, so used to
misfortune, that it was scarcely capable of hope—the idea that the
noise was made by workmen the governor had ordered to repair the
neighboring dungeon.

It was easy to ascertain this; but how could he risk the question? It
was easy to call his jailer’s attention to the noise, and watch his
countenance as he listened; but might he not by this means destroy
hopes far more important than the short-lived satisfaction of his own
curiosity? Unfortunately, Edmond’s brain was still so feeble that he
could not bend his thoughts to anything in particular. He saw but one
means of restoring lucidity and clearness to his judgment. He turned
his eyes towards the soup which the jailer had brought, rose, staggered
towards it, raised the vessel to his lips, and drank off the contents
with a feeling of indescribable pleasure.

He had the resolution to stop with this. He had often heard that
shipwrecked persons had died through having eagerly devoured too much
food. Edmond replaced on the table the bread he was about to devour,
and returned to his couch—he did not wish to die. He soon felt that his
ideas became again collected—he could think, and strengthen his
thoughts by reasoning. Then he said to himself:

“I must put this to the test, but without compromising anybody.