Soon a figure appeared in the gray twilight at the entrance
of the cave, formed by the reflection of the few rays of daylight which
had found their way into this gloomy retreat. ‘Who are you?’ cried
Selim. ‘But whoever you may be, I charge you not to advance another
step.’—‘Long live the emperor!’ said the figure. ‘He grants a full
pardon to the Vizier Ali, and not only gives him his life, but restores
to him his fortune and his possessions.’ My mother uttered a cry of
joy, and clasped me to her bosom. ‘Stop,’ said Selim, seeing that she
was about to go out; ‘you see I have not yet received the
ring,’—‘True,’ said my mother. And she fell on her knees, at the same
time holding me up towards heaven, as if she desired, while praying to
God in my behalf, to raise me actually to his presence.”

And for the second time Haydée stopped, overcome by such violent
emotion that the perspiration stood upon her pale brow, and her stifled
voice seemed hardly able to find utterance, so parched and dry were her
throat and lips.

40076m



Monte Cristo poured a little iced water into a glass, and presented it
to her, saying with a mildness in which was also a shade of
command,—“Courage.”

Haydée dried her eyes, and continued:

“By this time our eyes, habituated to the darkness, had recognized the
messenger of the pasha,—it was a friend. Selim had also recognized him,
but the brave young man only acknowledged one duty, which was to obey.
‘In whose name do you come?’ said he to him. ‘I come in the name of our
master, Ali Tepelini.’—‘If you come from Ali himself,’ said Selim, ‘you
know what you were charged to remit to me?’—‘Yes,’ said the messenger,
‘and I bring you his ring.’ At these words he raised his hand above his
head, to show the token; but it was too far off, and there was not
light enough to enable Selim, where he was standing, to distinguish and
recognize the object presented to his view. ‘I do not see what you have
in your hand,’ said Selim. ‘Approach then,’ said the messenger, ‘or I
will come nearer to you, if you prefer it.’—‘I will agree to neither
one nor the other,’ replied the young soldier; ‘place the object which
I desire to see in the ray of light which shines there, and retire
while I examine it.’—‘Be it so,’ said the envoy; and he retired, after
having first deposited the token agreed on in the place pointed out to
him by Selim.

“Oh, how our hearts palpitated; for it did, indeed, seem to be a ring
which was placed there. But was it my father’s ring? that was the
question. Selim, still holding in his hand the lighted match, walked
towards the opening in the cavern, and, aided by the faint light which
streamed in through the mouth of the cave, picked up the token.

“‘It is well,’ said he, kissing it; ‘it is my master’s ring!’ And
throwing the match on the ground, he trampled on it and extinguished
it. The messenger uttered a cry of joy and clapped his hands. At this
signal four soldiers of the Seraskier Kourchid suddenly appeared, and
Selim fell, pierced by five blows. Each man had stabbed him separately,
and, intoxicated by their crime, though still pale with fear, they
sought all over the cavern to discover if there was any fear of fire,
after which they amused themselves by rolling on the bags of gold. At
this moment my mother seized me in her arms, and hurrying noiselessly
along numerous turnings and windings known only to ourselves, she
arrived at a private staircase of the kiosk, where was a scene of
frightful tumult and confusion. The lower rooms were entirely filled
with Kourchid’s troops; that is to say, with our enemies. Just as my
mother was on the point of pushing open a small door, we heard the
voice of the pasha sounding in a loud and threatening tone. My mother
applied her eye to the crack between the boards; I luckily found a
small opening which afforded me a view of the apartment and what was
passing within. ‘What do you want?’ said my father to some people who
were holding a paper inscribed with characters of gold. ‘What we want,’
replied one, ‘is to communicate to you the will of his highness. Do you
see this firman?’—‘I do,’ said my father. ‘Well, read it; he demands
your head.’

40078m



“My father answered with a loud laugh, which was more frightful than
even threats would have been, and he had not ceased when two reports of
a pistol were heard; he had fired them himself, and had killed two men.
The Palikares, who were prostrated at my father’s feet, now sprang up
and fired, and the room was filled with fire and smoke. At the same
instant the firing began on the other side, and the balls penetrated
the boards all round us. Oh, how noble did the grand vizier my father
look at that moment, in the midst of the flying bullets, his scimitar
in his hand, and his face blackened with the powder of his enemies! and
how he terrified them, even then, and made them fly before him! ‘Selim,
Selim!’ cried he, ‘guardian of the fire, do your duty!’—‘Selim is
dead,’ replied a voice which seemed to come from the depths of the
earth, ‘and you are lost, Ali!’ At the same moment an explosion was
heard, and the flooring of the room in which my father was sitting was
suddenly torn up and shivered to atoms—the troops were firing from
underneath. Three or four Palikares fell with their bodies literally
ploughed with wounds.

“My father howled aloud, plunged his fingers into the holes which the
balls had made, and tore up one of the planks entire. But immediately
through this opening twenty more shots were fired, and the flame,
rushing up like fire from the crater of a volcano, soon reached the
tapestry, which it quickly devoured. In the midst of all this frightful
tumult and these terrific cries, two reports, fearfully distinct,
followed by two shrieks more heartrending than all, froze me with
terror. These two shots had mortally wounded my father, and it was he
who had given utterance to these frightful cries. However, he remained
standing, clinging to a window. My mother tried to force the door, that
she might go and die with him, but it was fastened on the inside. All
around him were lying the Palikares, writhing in convulsive agonies,
while two or three who were only slightly wounded were trying to escape
by springing from the windows. At this crisis the whole flooring
suddenly gave way, my father fell on one knee, and at the same moment
twenty hands were thrust forth, armed with sabres, pistols, and
poniards—twenty blows were instantaneously directed against one man,
and my father disappeared in a whirlwind of fire and smoke kindled by
these demons, and which seemed like hell itself opening beneath his
feet. I felt myself fall to the ground, my mother had fainted.”

Haydée’s arms fell by her side, and she uttered a deep groan, at the
same time looking towards the count as if to ask if he were satisfied
with her obedience to his commands.

Monte Cristo arose and approached her, took her hand, and said to her
in Romaic:

“Calm yourself, my dear child, and take courage in remembering that
there is a God who will punish traitors.”

“It is a frightful story, count,” said Albert, terrified at the
paleness of Haydée’s countenance, “and I reproach myself now for having
been so cruel and thoughtless in my request.”

“Oh, it is nothing,” said Monte Cristo. Then, patting the young girl on
the head, he continued, “Haydée is very courageous, and she sometimes
even finds consolation in the recital of her misfortunes.”

“Because, my lord,” said Haydée eagerly, “my miseries recall to me the
remembrance of your goodness.”

Albert looked at her with curiosity, for she had not yet related what
he most desired to know,—how she had become the slave of the count.
Haydée saw at a glance the same expression pervading the countenances
of her two auditors; she continued:

“When my mother recovered her senses we were before the seraskier.
‘Kill,’ said she, ‘but spare the honor of the widow of Ali.’—‘It is not
to me to whom you must address yourself,’ said Kourchid.

“‘To whom, then?’—‘To your new master.’

“‘Who and where is he?’—‘He is here.’

“And Kourchid pointed out one who had more than any contributed to the
death of my father,” said Haydée, in a tone of chastened anger.

“Then,” said Albert, “you became the property of this man?”

40080m



“No,” replied Haydée, “he did not dare to keep us, so we were sold to
some slave-merchants who were going to Constantinople. We traversed
Greece, and arrived half dead at the imperial gates. They were
surrounded by a crowd of people, who opened a way for us to pass, when
suddenly my mother, having looked closely at an object which was
attracting their attention, uttered a piercing cry and fell to the
ground, pointing as she did so to a head which was placed over the
gates, and beneath which were inscribed these words:

‘_This is the head of Ali Tepelini, Pasha of Yanina._’

“I cried bitterly, and tried to raise my mother from the earth, but she
was dead! I was taken to the slave-market, and was purchased by a rich
Armenian. He caused me to be instructed, gave me masters, and when I
was thirteen years of age he sold me to the Sultan Mahmoud.”

“Of whom I bought her,” said Monte Cristo, “as I told you, Albert, with
the emerald which formed a match to the one I had made into a box for
the purpose of holding my hashish pills.”

“Oh, you are good, you are great, my lord!” said Haydée, kissing the
count’s hand, “and I am very fortunate in belonging to such a master!”

Albert remained quite bewildered with all that he had seen and heard.

“Come, finish your cup of coffee,” said Monte Cristo; “the history is
ended.”



 Chapter 78. We hear From Yanina

If Valentine could have seen the trembling step and agitated
countenance of Franz when he quitted the chamber of M. Noirtier, even
she would have been constrained to pity him.