”

“Ah, true,” said Monte Cristo “there is a postscript.”

“Yes, yes,” repeated the major, “yes—there—is—a—postscript.”

“‘In order to save Major Cavalcanti the trouble of drawing on his
banker, I send him a draft for 2,000 francs to defray his travelling
expenses, and credit on you for the further sum of 48,000 francs, which
you still owe me.’”

The major awaited the conclusion of the postscript, apparently with
great anxiety.

“Very good,” said the count.

“He said ‘very good,’” muttered the major, “then—sir——” replied he.

“Then what?” asked Monte Cristo.

“Then the postscript——”

“Well; what of the postscript?”

“Then the postscript is as favorably received by you as the rest of the
letter?”

“Certainly; the Abbé Busoni and myself have a small account open
between us. I do not remember if it is exactly 48,000 francs, which I
am still owing him, but I dare say we shall not dispute the difference.
You attached great importance, then, to this postscript, my dear
Monsieur Cavalcanti?”

“I must explain to you,” said the major, “that, fully confiding in the
signature of the Abbé Busoni, I had not provided myself with any other
funds; so that if this resource had failed me, I should have found
myself very unpleasantly situated in Paris.”

“Is it possible that a man of your standing should be embarrassed
anywhere?” said Monte Cristo.

“Why, really I know no one,” said the major.

“But then you yourself are known to others?”

“Yes, I am known, so that——”

“Proceed, my dear Monsieur Cavalcanti.”

“So that you will remit to me these 48,000 francs?”

“Certainly, at your first request.” The major’s eyes dilated with
pleasing astonishment. “But sit down,” said Monte Cristo; “really I do
not know what I have been thinking of—I have positively kept you
standing for the last quarter of an hour.”

“Don’t mention it.” The major drew an armchair towards him, and
proceeded to seat himself.

“Now,” said the count, “what will you take—a glass of sherry, port, or
Alicante?”

“Alicante, if you please; it is my favorite wine.”

“I have some that is very good. You will take a biscuit with it, will
you not?”

“Yes, I will take a biscuit, as you are so obliging.”

Monte Cristo rang; Baptistin appeared. The count advanced to meet him.

“Well?” said he in a low voice.

“The young man is here,” said the valet de chambre in the same tone.

“Into what room did you take him?”

“Into the blue drawing-room, according to your excellency’s orders.”

“That’s right; now bring the Alicante and some biscuits.”

Baptistin left the room.

“Really,” said the major, “I am quite ashamed of the trouble I am
giving you.”

“Pray don’t mention such a thing,” said the count. Baptistin re-entered
with glasses, wine, and biscuits. The count filled one glass, but in
the other he only poured a few drops of the ruby-colored liquid. The
bottle was covered with spiders’ webs, and all the other signs which
indicate the age of wine more truly than do wrinkles on a man’s face.
The major made a wise choice; he took the full glass and a biscuit. The
count told Baptistin to leave the plate within reach of his guest, who
began by sipping the Alicante with an expression of great satisfaction,
and then delicately steeped his biscuit in the wine.

30123m



“So, sir, you lived at Lucca, did you? You were rich, noble, held in
great esteem—had all that could render a man happy?”

“All,” said the major, hastily swallowing his biscuit, “positively
all.”

“And yet there was one thing wanting in order to complete your
happiness?”

“Only one thing,” said the Italian.

“And that one thing, your lost child.”

“Ah,” said the major, taking a second biscuit, “that consummation of my
happiness was indeed wanting.” The worthy major raised his eyes to
heaven and sighed.

“Let me hear, then,” said the count, “who this deeply regretted son
was; for I always understood you were a bachelor.”

“That was the general opinion, sir,” said the major, “and I——”

“Yes,” replied the count, “and you confirmed the report. A youthful
indiscretion, I suppose, which you were anxious to conceal from the
world at large?”

The major recovered himself, and resumed his usual calm manner, at the
same time casting his eyes down, either to give himself time to compose
his countenance, or to assist his imagination, all the while giving an
under-look at the count, the protracted smile on whose lips still
announced the same polite curiosity.

“Yes,” said the major, “I did wish this fault to be hidden from every
eye.”

“Not on your own account, surely,” replied Monte Cristo; “for a man is
above that sort of thing?”

“Oh, no, certainly not on my own account,” said the major with a smile
and a shake of the head.

“But for the sake of the mother?” said the count.

“Yes, for the mother’s sake—his poor mother!” cried the major, taking a
third biscuit.

“Take some more wine, my dear Cavalcanti,” said the count, pouring out
for him a second glass of Alicante; “your emotion has quite overcome
you.”

“His poor mother,” murmured the major, trying to get the lachrymal
gland in operation, so as to moisten the corner of his eye with a false
tear.

“She belonged to one of the first families in Italy, I think, did she
not?”

“She was of a noble family of Fiesole, count.”

“And her name was——”

“Do you desire to know her name——?”

“Oh,” said Monte Cristo “it would be quite superfluous for you to tell
me, for I already know it.”

“The count knows everything,” said the Italian, bowing.

“Oliva Corsinari, was it not?”

“Oliva Corsinari!”

“A marchioness?”

“A marchioness!”

“And you married her at last, notwithstanding the opposition of her
family?”

“Yes, that was the way it ended.”

“And you have doubtless brought all your papers with you?” said Monte
Cristo.

“What papers?”

“The certificate of your marriage with Oliva Corsinari, and the
register of your child’s birth.”

“The register of my child’s birth?”

“The register of the birth of Andrea Cavalcanti—of your son; is not his
name Andrea?”

“I believe so,” said the major.

“What? You believe so?”

“I dare not positively assert it, as he has been lost for so long a
time.”

“Well, then,” said Monte Cristo “you have all the documents with you?”

“Your excellency, I regret to say that, not knowing it was necessary to
come provided with these papers, I neglected to bring them.”

“That is unfortunate,” returned Monte Cristo.

“Were they, then, so necessary?”

“They were indispensable.”

The major passed his hand across his brow. “Ah, _perbacco_,
indispensable, were they?”

“Certainly they were; supposing there were to be doubts raised as to
the validity of your marriage or the legitimacy of your child?”

“True,” said the major, “there might be doubts raised.”

“In that case your son would be very unpleasantly situated.”

“It would be fatal to his interests.”

“It might cause him to fail in some desirable matrimonial alliance.”

“_O peccato!_”

“You must know that in France they are very particular on these points;
it is not sufficient, as in Italy, to go to the priest and say, ‘We
love each other, and want you to marry us.’ Marriage is a civil affair
in France, and in order to marry in an orthodox manner you must have
papers which undeniably establish your identity.”

“That is the misfortune! You see I have not these necessary papers.”

“Fortunately, I have them, though,” said Monte Cristo.

“You?”

“Yes.”

“You have them?”

“I have them.”

“Ah, indeed?” said the major, who, seeing the object of his journey
frustrated by the absence of the papers, feared also that his
forgetfulness might give rise to some difficulty concerning the 48,000
francs—“ah, indeed, that is a fortunate circumstance; yes, that really
is lucky, for it never occurred to me to bring them.”

“I do not at all wonder at it—one cannot think of everything; but,
happily, the Abbé Busoni thought for you.”

“He is an excellent person.”

“He is extremely prudent and thoughtful.”

“He is an admirable man,” said the major; “and he sent them to you?”

“Here they are.”

The major clasped his hands in token of admiration.

“You married Oliva Corsinari in the church of San Paolo del
Monte-Cattini; here is the priest’s certificate.”

“Yes indeed, there it is truly,” said the Italian, looking on with
astonishment.

“And here is Andrea Cavalcanti’s baptismal register, given by the curé
of Saravezza.”

“All quite correct.”

“Take these documents, then; they do not concern me. You will give them
to your son, who will, of course, take great care of them.”

“I should think so, indeed! If he were to lose them——”

“Well, and if he were to lose them?” said Monte Cristo.

“In that case,” replied the major, “it would be necessary to write to
the curé for duplicates, and it would be some time before they could be
obtained.”

“It would be a difficult matter to arrange,” said Monte Cristo.

“Almost an impossibility,” replied the major.

“I am very glad to see that you understand the value of these papers.”

“I regard them as invaluable.”

“Now,” said Monte Cristo “as to the mother of the young man——”

“As to the mother of the young man——” repeated the Italian, with
anxiety.

“As regards the Marchesa Corsinari——”

“Really,” said the major, “difficulties seem to thicken upon us; will
she be wanted in any way?”

“No, sir,” replied Monte Cristo; “besides, has she not——”

“Yes, sir,” said the major, “she has——”

30127m



“Paid the last debt of nature?”

“Alas, yes,” returned the Italian.

“I knew that,” said Monte Cristo; “she has been dead these ten years.”

“And I am still mourning her loss,” exclaimed the major, drawing from
his pocket a checked handkerchief, and alternately wiping first the
left and then the right eye.

“What would you have?