Overhead I could accurately
distinguish every movement of the jeweller, who, after making the best
arrangements in his power for passing a comfortable night, threw
himself on his bed, and I could hear it creak and groan beneath his
weight.

“Insensibly my eyelids grew heavy, deep sleep stole over me, and having
no suspicion of anything wrong, I sought not to shake it off. I looked
into the kitchen once more and saw Caderousse sitting by the side of a
long table upon one of the low wooden stools which in country places
are frequently used instead of chairs; his back was turned towards me,
so that I could not see the expression of his countenance—neither
should I have been able to do so had he been placed differently, as his
head was buried between his two hands. La Carconte continued to gaze on
him for some time, then shrugging her shoulders, she took her seat
immediately opposite to him.

“At this moment the expiring embers threw up a fresh flame from the
kindling of a piece of wood that lay near, and a bright light flashed
over the room. La Carconte still kept her eyes fixed on her husband,
but as he made no sign of changing his position, she extended her hard,
bony hand, and touched him on the forehead.

20317m



“Caderousse shuddered. The woman’s lips seemed to move, as though she
were talking; but because she merely spoke in an undertone, or my
senses were dulled by sleep, I did not catch a word she uttered.
Confused sights and sounds seemed to float before me, and gradually I
fell into a deep, heavy slumber. How long I had been in this
unconscious state I know not, when I was suddenly aroused by the report
of a pistol, followed by a fearful cry. Weak and tottering footsteps
resounded across the chamber above me, and the next instant a dull,
heavy weight seemed to fall powerless on the staircase. I had not yet
fully recovered consciousness, when again I heard groans, mingled with
half-stifled cries, as if from persons engaged in a deadly struggle. A
cry more prolonged than the others and ending in a series of groans
effectually roused me from my drowsy lethargy. Hastily raising myself
on one arm, I looked around, but all was dark; and it seemed to me as
if the rain must have penetrated through the flooring of the room
above, for some kind of moisture appeared to fall, drop by drop, upon
my forehead, and when I passed my hand across my brow, I felt that it
was wet and clammy.

“To the fearful noises that had awakened me had succeeded the most
perfect silence—unbroken, save by the footsteps of a man walking about
in the chamber above. The staircase creaked, he descended into the room
below, approached the fire and lit a candle.

“The man was Caderousse—he was pale and his shirt was all bloody.
Having obtained the light, he hurried upstairs again, and once more I
heard his rapid and uneasy footsteps.

“A moment later he came down again, holding in his hand the small
shagreen case, which he opened, to assure himself it contained the
diamond,—seemed to hesitate as to which pocket he should put it in,
then, as if dissatisfied with the security of either pocket, he
deposited it in his red handkerchief, which he carefully rolled round
his head.

“After this he took from his cupboard the bank-notes and gold he had
put there, thrust the one into the pocket of his trousers, and the
other into that of his waistcoat, hastily tied up a small bundle of
linen, and rushing towards the door, disappeared in the darkness of the
night.

“Then all became clear and manifest to me, and I reproached myself with
what had happened, as though I myself had done the guilty deed. I
fancied that I still heard faint moans, and imagining that the
unfortunate jeweller might not be quite dead, I determined to go to his
relief, by way of atoning in some slight degree, not for the crime I
had committed, but for that which I had not endeavored to prevent. For
this purpose I applied all the strength I possessed to force an
entrance from the cramped spot in which I lay to the adjoining room.
The poorly fastened boards which alone divided me from it yielded to my
efforts, and I found myself in the house. Hastily snatching up the
lighted candle, I hurried to the staircase; about midway a body was
lying quite across the stairs. It was that of La Carconte. The pistol I
had heard had doubtless been fired at her. The shot had frightfully
lacerated her throat, leaving two gaping wounds from which, as well as
the mouth, the blood was pouring in floods. She was stone dead. I
strode past her, and ascended to the sleeping chamber, which presented
an appearance of the wildest disorder. The furniture had been knocked
over in the deadly struggle that had taken place there, and the sheets,
to which the unfortunate jeweller had doubtless clung, were dragged
across the room. The murdered man lay on the floor, his head leaning
against the wall, and about him was a pool of blood which poured forth
from three large wounds in his breast; there was a fourth gash, in
which a long table knife was plunged up to the handle.

“I stumbled over some object; I stooped to examine—it was the second
pistol, which had not gone off, probably from the powder being wet. I
approached the jeweller, who was not quite dead, and at the sound of my
footsteps and the creaking of the floor, he opened his eyes, fixed them
on me with an anxious and inquiring gaze, moved his lips as though
trying to speak, then, overcome by the effort, fell back and expired.

“This appalling sight almost bereft me of my senses, and finding that I
could no longer be of service to anyone in the house, my only desire
was to fly. I rushed towards the staircase, clutching my hair, and
uttering a groan of horror.

“Upon reaching the room below, I found five or six custom-house
officers, and two or three gendarmes—all heavily armed. They threw
themselves upon me. I made no resistance; I was no longer master of my
senses. When I strove to speak, a few inarticulate sounds alone escaped
my lips.

“As I noticed the significant manner in which the whole party pointed
to my blood-stained garments, I involuntarily surveyed myself, and then
I discovered that the thick warm drops that had so bedewed me as I lay
beneath the staircase must have been the blood of La Carconte. I
pointed to the spot where I had concealed myself.

“‘What does he mean?’ asked a gendarme.

“One of the officers went to the place I directed.

“‘He means,’ replied the man upon his return, ‘that he got in that
way;’ and he showed the hole I had made when I broke through.

“Then I saw that they took me for the assassin. I recovered force and
energy enough to free myself from the hands of those who held me, while
I managed to stammer forth:

“‘I did not do it! Indeed, indeed I did not!’

“A couple of gendarmes held the muzzles of their carbines against my
breast.

“‘Stir but a step,’ said they, ‘and you are a dead man.’

“‘Why should you threaten me with death,’ cried I, ‘when I have already
declared my innocence?’

“‘Tush, tush,’ cried the men; ‘keep your innocent stories to tell to
the judge at Nîmes. Meanwhile, come along with us; and the best advice
we can give you is to do so unresistingly.’

“Alas, resistance was far from my thoughts. I was utterly overpowered
by surprise and terror; and without a word I suffered myself to be
handcuffed and tied to a horse’s tail, and thus they took me to Nîmes.

“I had been tracked by a customs-officer, who had lost sight of me near
the tavern; feeling certain that I intended to pass the night there, he
had returned to summon his comrades, who just arrived in time to hear
the report of the pistol, and to take me in the midst of such
circumstantial proofs of my guilt as rendered all hopes of proving my
innocence utterly futile. One only chance was left me, that of
beseeching the magistrate before whom I was taken to cause every
inquiry to be made for the Abbé Busoni, who had stopped at the inn of
the Pont du Gard on that morning.

“If Caderousse had invented the story relative to the diamond, and
there existed no such person as the Abbé Busoni, then, indeed, I was
lost past redemption, or, at least, my life hung upon the feeble chance
of Caderousse himself being apprehended and confessing the whole truth.

“Two months passed away in hopeless expectation on my part, while I
must do the magistrate the justice to say that he used every means to
obtain information of the person I declared could exculpate me if he
would. Caderousse still evaded all pursuit, and I had resigned myself
to what seemed my inevitable fate. My trial was to come on at the
approaching assizes; when, on the 8th of September—that is to say,
precisely three months and five days after the events which had
perilled my life—the Abbé Busoni, whom I never ventured to believe I
should see, presented himself at the prison doors, saying he understood
one of the prisoners wished to speak to him; he added, that having
learned at Marseilles the particulars of my imprisonment, he hastened
to comply with my desire.

“You may easily imagine with what eagerness I welcomed him, and how
minutely I related the whole of what I had seen and heard. I felt some
degree of nervousness as I entered upon the history of the diamond,
but, to my inexpressible astonishment, he confirmed it in every
particular, and to my equal surprise, he seemed to place entire belief
in all I said.

“And then it was that, won by his mild charity, seeing that he was
acquainted with all the habits and customs of my own country, and
considering also that pardon for the only crime of which I was really
guilty might come with a double power from lips so benevolent and kind,
I besought him to receive my confession, under the seal of which I
recounted the Auteuil affair in all its details, as well as every other
transaction of my life.