How fortunate that
Eugénie is possessed of that strange character which has so often made
me tremble!”

And her glance was turned towards heaven, where a mysterious Providence
disposes all things, and out of a fault, nay, even a vice, sometimes
produces a blessing. And then her thoughts, cleaving through space like
a bird in the air, rested on Cavalcanti. This Andrea was a wretch, a
robber, an assassin, and yet his manners showed the effects of a sort
of education, if not a complete one; he had been presented to the world
with the appearance of an immense fortune, supported by an honorable
name. How could she extricate herself from this labyrinth? To whom
would she apply to help her out of this painful situation? Debray, to
whom she had run, with the first instinct of a woman towards the man
she loves, and who yet betrays her,—Debray could but give her advice,
she must apply to someone more powerful than he.

The baroness then thought of M. de Villefort. It was M. de Villefort
who had remorselessly brought misfortune into her family, as though
they had been strangers. But, no; on reflection, the procureur was not
a merciless man; and it was not the magistrate, slave to his duties,
but the friend, the loyal friend, who roughly but firmly cut into the
very core of the corruption; it was not the executioner, but the
surgeon, who wished to withdraw the honor of Danglars from ignominious
association with the disgraced young man they had presented to the
world as their son-in-law. And since Villefort, the friend of Danglars,
had acted in this way, no one could suppose that he had been previously
acquainted with, or had lent himself to, any of Andrea’s intrigues.
Villefort’s conduct, therefore, upon reflection, appeared to the
baroness as if shaped for their mutual advantage. But the inflexibility
of the procureur should stop there; she would see him the next day, and
if she could not make him fail in his duties as a magistrate, she
would, at least, obtain all the indulgence he could allow. She would
invoke the past, recall old recollections; she would supplicate him by
the remembrance of guilty, yet happy days. M. de Villefort would stifle
the affair; he had only to turn his eyes on one side, and allow Andrea
to fly, and follow up the crime under that shadow of guilt called
contempt of court. And after this reasoning she slept easily.

At nine o’clock next morning she arose, and without ringing for her
maid or giving the least sign of her activity, she dressed herself in
the same simple style as on the previous night; then running
downstairs, she left the hotel, walked to the Rue de Provence, called a
cab, and drove to M. de Villefort’s house.

For the last month this wretched house had presented the gloomy
appearance of a lazaretto infected with the plague. Some of the
apartments were closed within and without; the shutters were only
opened to admit a minute’s air, showing the scared face of a footman,
and immediately afterwards the window would be closed, like a
gravestone falling on a sepulchre, and the neighbors would say to each
other in a low voice, “Will there be another funeral today at the
procureur’s house?”

Madame Danglars involuntarily shuddered at the desolate aspect of the
mansion; descending from the cab, she approached the door with
trembling knees, and rang the bell. Three times did the bell ring with
a dull, heavy sound, seeming to participate, in the general sadness,
before the concierge appeared and peeped through the door, which he
opened just wide enough to allow his words to be heard. He saw a lady,
a fashionable, elegantly dressed lady, and yet the door remained almost
closed.

“Do you intend opening the door?” said the baroness.

“First, madame, who are you?”

“Who am I? You know me well enough.”

“We no longer know anyone, madame.”

“You must be mad, my friend,” said the baroness.

“Where do you come from?”

“Oh, this is too much!”

“Madame, these are my orders; excuse me. Your name?”

“The baroness Danglars; you have seen me twenty times.”

“Possibly, madame. And now, what do you want?”

“Oh, how extraordinary! I shall complain to M. de Villefort of the
impertinence of his servants.”

“Madame, this is precaution, not impertinence; no one enters here
without an order from M. d’Avrigny, or without speaking to the
procureur.”

“Well, I have business with the procureur.”

“Is it pressing business?”

“You can imagine so, since I have not even brought my carriage out yet.
But enough of this—here is my card, take it to your master.”

“Madame will await my return?”

“Yes; go.”

The concierge closed the door, leaving Madame Danglars in the street.
She had not long to wait; directly afterwards the door was opened wide
enough to admit her, and when she had passed through, it was again
shut. Without losing sight of her for an instant, the concierge took a
whistle from his pocket as soon as they entered the court, and blew it.
The valet de chambre appeared on the door-steps.

“You will excuse this poor fellow, madame,” he said, as he preceded the
baroness, “but his orders are precise, and M. de Villefort begged me to
tell you that he could not act otherwise.”

In the court showing his merchandise, was a tradesman who had been
admitted with the same precautions. The baroness ascended the steps;
she felt herself strongly infected with the sadness which seemed to
magnify her own, and still guided by the valet de chambre, who never
lost sight of her for an instant, she was introduced to the
magistrate’s study.

Preoccupied as Madame Danglars had been with the object of her visit,
the treatment she had received from these underlings appeared to her so
insulting, that she began by complaining of it. But Villefort, raising
his head, bowed down by grief, looked up at her with so sad a smile
that her complaints died upon her lips.

“Forgive my servants,” he said, “for a terror I cannot blame them for;
from being suspected they have become suspicious.”

Madame Danglars had often heard of the terror to which the magistrate
alluded, but without the evidence of her own eyesight she could never
have believed that the sentiment had been carried so far.

“You too, then, are unhappy?” she said.

“Yes, madame,” replied the magistrate.

“Then you pity me!”

“Sincerely, madame.”

“And you understand what brings me here?”

“You wish to speak to me about the circumstance which has just
happened?”

“Yes, sir,—a fearful misfortune.”

“You mean a mischance.”

“A mischance?” repeated the baroness.

“Alas, madame,” said the procureur with his imperturbable calmness of
manner, “I consider those alone misfortunes which are irreparable.”

“And do you suppose this will be forgotten?”

“Everything will be forgotten, madame,” said Villefort. “Your daughter
will be married tomorrow, if not today—in a week, if not tomorrow; and
I do not think you can regret the intended husband of your daughter.”

Madame Danglars gazed on Villefort, stupefied to find him so almost
insultingly calm. “Am I come to a friend?” she asked in a tone full of
mournful dignity.

“You know that you are, madame,” said Villefort, whose pale cheeks
became slightly flushed as he gave her the assurance. And truly this
assurance carried him back to different events from those now occupying
the baroness and him.

“Well, then, be more affectionate, my dear Villefort,” said the
baroness. “Speak to me not as a magistrate, but as a friend; and when I
am in bitter anguish of spirit, do not tell me that I ought to be gay.”
Villefort bowed.

“When I hear misfortunes named, madame,” he said, “I have within the
last few months contracted the bad habit of thinking of my own, and
then I cannot help drawing up an egotistical parallel in my mind. That
is the reason that by the side of my misfortunes yours appear to me
mere mischances; that is why my dreadful position makes yours appear
enviable. But this annoys you; let us change the subject. You were
saying, madame——”

“I came to ask you, my friend,” said the baroness, “what will be done
with this impostor?”

“Impostor,” repeated Villefort; “certainly, madame, you appear to
extenuate some cases, and exaggerate others. Impostor, indeed!—M.
Andrea Cavalcanti, or rather M. Benedetto, is nothing more nor less
than an assassin!”

“Sir, I do not deny the justice of your correction, but the more
severely you arm yourself against that unfortunate man, the more deeply
will you strike our family. Come, forget him for a moment, and instead
of pursuing him, let him go.”

“You are too late, madame; the orders are issued.”

“Well, should he be arrested—do they think they will arrest him?”

“I hope so.”

“If they should arrest him (I know that sometimes prisons afford means
of escape), will you leave him in prison?”

The procureur shook his head.

“At least keep him there till my daughter be married.”

“Impossible, madame; justice has its formalities.”

“What, even for me?” said the baroness, half jesting, half in earnest.

“For all, even for myself among the rest,” replied Villefort.

50063m



“Ah!” exclaimed the baroness, without expressing the ideas which the
exclamation betrayed. Villefort looked at her with that piercing glance
which reads the secrets of the heart.

“Yes, I know what you mean,” he said; “you refer to the terrible rumors
spread abroad in the world, that the deaths which have kept me in
mourning for the last three months, and from which Valentine has only
escaped by a miracle, have not happened by natural means.”

“I was not thinking of that,” replied Madame Danglars quickly.

“Yes, you were thinking of it, and with justice. You could not help
thinking of it, and saying to yourself, ‘you, who pursue crime so
vindictively, answer now, why are there unpunished crimes in your
dwelling?’” The baroness became pale.