Madame de Villefort and I have a communication to make to you.”

Noirtier’s face remained perfectly passive during this long preamble,
while, on the contrary, Villefort’s eye was endeavoring to penetrate
into the inmost recesses of the old man’s heart.

“This communication,” continued the procureur, in that cold and
decisive tone which seemed at once to preclude all discussion, “will,
we are sure, meet with your approbation.”

The eye of the invalid still retained that vacancy of expression which
prevented his son from obtaining any knowledge of the feelings which
were passing in his mind; he listened, nothing more.

“Sir,” resumed Villefort, “we are thinking of marrying Valentine.” Had
the old man’s face been moulded in wax it could not have shown less
emotion at this news than was now to be traced there. “The marriage
will take place in less than three months,” said Villefort.

Noirtier’s eye still retained its inanimate expression.

Madame de Villefort now took her part in the conversation and added:

“We thought this news would possess an interest for you, sir, who have
always entertained a great affection for Valentine; it therefore only
now remains for us to tell you the name of the young man for whom she
is destined. It is one of the most desirable connections which could
possibly be formed; he possesses fortune, a high rank in society, and
every personal qualification likely to render Valentine supremely
happy,—his name, moreover, cannot be wholly unknown to you. It is M.
Franz de Quesnel, Baron d’Épinay.”

While his wife was speaking, Villefort had narrowly watched the old
man’s countenance. When Madame de Villefort pronounced the name of
Franz, the pupil of M. Noirtier’s eye began to dilate, and his eyelids
trembled with the same movement that may be perceived on the lips of an
individual about to speak, and he darted a lightning glance at Madame
de Villefort and his son. The procureur, who knew the political hatred
which had formerly existed between M. Noirtier and the elder d’Épinay,
well understood the agitation and anger which the announcement had
produced; but, feigning not to perceive either, he immediately resumed
the narrative begun by his wife.

“Sir,” said he, “you are aware that Valentine is about to enter her
nineteenth year, which renders it important that she should lose no
time in forming a suitable alliance. Nevertheless, you have not been
forgotten in our plans, and we have fully ascertained beforehand that
Valentine’s future husband will consent, not to live in this house, for
that might not be pleasant for the young people, but that you should
live with them; so that you and Valentine, who are so attached to each
other, would not be separated, and you would be able to pursue exactly
the same course of life which you have hitherto done, and thus, instead
of losing, you will be a gainer by the change, as it will secure to you
two children instead of one, to watch over and comfort you.”

30165m



Noirtier’s look was furious; it was very evident that something
desperate was passing in the old man’s mind, for a cry of anger and
grief rose in his throat, and not being able to find vent in utterance,
appeared almost to choke him, for his face and lips turned quite purple
with the struggle. Villefort quietly opened a window, saying, “It is
very warm, and the heat affects M. Noirtier.” He then returned to his
place, but did not sit down.

“This marriage,” added Madame de Villefort, “is quite agreeable to the
wishes of M. d’Épinay and his family; besides, he had no relations
nearer than an uncle and aunt, his mother having died at his birth, and
his father having been assassinated in 1815, that is to say, when he
was but two years old; it naturally followed that the child was
permitted to choose his own pursuits, and he has, therefore, seldom
acknowledged any other authority but that of his own will.”

“That assassination was a mysterious affair,” said Villefort, “and the
perpetrators have hitherto escaped detection, although suspicion has
fallen on the head of more than one person.”

Noirtier made such an effort that his lips expanded into a smile.

“Now,” continued Villefort, “those to whom the guilt really belongs, by
whom the crime was committed, on whose heads the justice of man may
probably descend here, and the certain judgment of God hereafter, would
rejoice in the opportunity thus afforded of bestowing such a
peace-offering as Valentine on the son of him whose life they so
ruthlessly destroyed.” Noirtier had succeeded in mastering his emotion
more than could have been deemed possible with such an enfeebled and
shattered frame.

“Yes, I understand,” was the reply contained in his look; and this look
expressed a feeling of strong indignation, mixed with profound
contempt. Villefort fully understood his father’s meaning, and answered
by a slight shrug of his shoulders. He then motioned to his wife to
take leave.

“Now sir,” said Madame de Villefort, “I must bid you farewell. Would
you like me to send Edward to you for a short time?”

It had been agreed that the old man should express his approbation by
closing his eyes, his refusal by winking them several times, and if he
had some desire or feeling to express, he raised them to heaven. If he
wanted Valentine, he closed his right eye only, and if Barrois, the
left. At Madame de Villefort’s proposition he instantly winked his
eyes.

Provoked by a complete refusal, she bit her lip and said, “Then shall I
send Valentine to you?” The old man closed his eyes eagerly, thereby
intimating that such was his wish.

M. and Madame de Villefort bowed and left the room, giving orders that
Valentine should be summoned to her grandfather’s presence, and feeling
sure that she would have much to do to restore calmness to the
perturbed spirit of the invalid. Valentine, with a color still
heightened by emotion, entered the room just after her parents had
quitted it. One look was sufficient to tell her that her grandfather
was suffering, and that there was much on his mind which he was wishing
to communicate to her.

“Dear grandpapa,” cried she, “what has happened? They have vexed you,
and you are angry?”

The paralytic closed his eyes in token of assent.

“Who has displeased you? Is it my father?”

“No.”

“Madame de Villefort?”

“No.”

“Me?” The former sign was repeated.

“Are you displeased with me?” cried Valentine in astonishment. M.
Noirtier again closed his eyes.

“And what have I done, dear grandpapa, that you should be angry with
me?” cried Valentine.

There was no answer, and she continued:

“I have not seen you all day. Has anyone been speaking to you against
me?”

“Yes,” said the old man’s look, with eagerness.

“Let me think a moment. I do assure you, grandpapa—Ah—M. and Madame de
Villefort have just left this room, have they not?”

“Yes.”

“And it was they who told you something which made you angry? What was
it then? May I go and ask them, that I may have the opportunity of
making my peace with you?”

“No, no,” said Noirtier’s look.

“Ah, you frighten me. What can they have said?” and she again tried to
think what it could be.

“Ah, I know,” said she, lowering her voice and going close to the old
man. “They have been speaking of my marriage,—have they not?”

“Yes,” replied the angry look.

“I understand; you are displeased at the silence I have preserved on
the subject. The reason of it was, that they had insisted on my keeping
the matter a secret, and begged me not to tell you anything of it. They
did not even acquaint me with their intentions, and I only discovered
them by chance, that is why I have been so reserved with you, dear
grandpapa. Pray forgive me.”

But there was no look calculated to reassure her; all it seemed to say
was, “It is not only your reserve which afflicts me.”

“What is it, then?” asked the young girl. “Perhaps you think I shall
abandon you, dear grandpapa, and that I shall forget you when I am
married?”

“No.”

“They told you, then, that M. d’Épinay consented to our all living
together?”

“Yes.”

“Then why are you still vexed and grieved?” The old man’s eyes beamed
with an expression of gentle affection.

“Yes, I understand,” said Valentine; “it is because you love me.” The
old man assented.

“And you are afraid I shall be unhappy?”

“Yes.”

“You do not like M. Franz?” The eyes repeated several times, “No, no,
no.”

“Then you are vexed with the engagement?”

“Yes.”

“Well, listen,” said Valentine, throwing herself on her knees, and
putting her arm round her grandfather’s neck, “I am vexed, too, for I
do not love M. Franz d’Épinay.”

An expression of intense joy illumined the old man’s eyes.

“When I wished to retire into a convent, you remember how angry you
were with me?” A tear trembled in the eye of the invalid. “Well,”
continued Valentine, “the reason of my proposing it was that I might
escape this hateful marriage, which drives me to despair.” Noirtier’s
breathing came thick and short.

“Then the idea of this marriage really grieves you too? Ah, if you
could but help me—if we could both together defeat their plan! But you
are unable to oppose them,—you, whose mind is so quick, and whose will
is so firm are nevertheless, as weak and unequal to the contest as I am
myself. Alas, you, who would have been such a powerful protector to me
in the days of your health and strength, can now only sympathize in my
joys and sorrows, without being able to take any active part in them.
However, this is much, and calls for gratitude and Heaven has not taken
away all my blessings when it leaves me your sympathy and kindness.”

At these words there appeared in Noirtier’s eye an expression of such
deep meaning that the young girl thought she could read these words
there: “You are mistaken; I can still do much for you.