The two Cavalcanti
bowed to the count, and left the house. Monte Cristo went to the
window, and saw them crossing the street, arm in arm.

“There go two miscreants;” said he, “it is a pity they are not really
related!” Then, after an instant of gloomy reflection, “Come, I will go
to see the Morrels,” said he; “I think that disgust is even more
sickening than hatred.”

30147m




 Chapter 57. In the Lucern Patch

Our readers must now allow us to transport them again to the enclosure
surrounding M. de Villefort’s house, and, behind the gate, half
screened from view by the large chestnut-trees, which on all sides
spread their luxuriant branches, we shall find some people of our
acquaintance. This time Maximilian was the first to arrive. He was
intently watching for a shadow to appear among the trees, and awaiting
with anxiety the sound of a light step on the gravel walk.

At length, the long-desired sound was heard, and instead of one figure,
as he had expected, he perceived that two were approaching him. The
delay had been occasioned by a visit from Madame Danglars and Eugénie,
which had been prolonged beyond the time at which Valentine was
expected. That she might not appear to fail in her promise to
Maximilian, she proposed to Mademoiselle Danglars that they should take
a walk in the garden, being anxious to show that the delay, which was
doubtless a cause of vexation to him, was not occasioned by any neglect
on her part. The young man, with the intuitive perception of a lover,
quickly understood the circumstances in which she was involuntarily
placed, and he was comforted. Besides, although she avoided coming
within speaking distance, Valentine arranged so that Maximilian could
see her pass and repass, and each time she went by, she managed,
unperceived by her companion, to cast an expressive look at the young
man, which seemed to say, “Have patience! You see it is not my fault.”

And Maximilian was patient, and employed himself in mentally
contrasting the two girls,—one fair, with soft languishing eyes, a
figure gracefully bending like a weeping willow; the other a brunette,
with a fierce and haughty expression, and as straight as a poplar. It
is unnecessary to state that, in the eyes of the young man, Valentine
did not suffer by the contrast. In about half an hour the girls went
away, and Maximilian understood that Mademoiselle Danglars’ visit had
at last come to an end. In a few minutes Valentine re-entered the
garden alone. For fear that anyone should be observing her return, she
walked slowly; and instead of immediately directing her steps towards
the gate, she seated herself on a bench, and, carefully casting her
eyes around, to convince herself that she was not watched, she
presently arose, and proceeded quickly to join Maximilian.

“Good-evening, Valentine,” said a well-known voice.

“Good-evening, Maximilian; I know I have kept you waiting, but you saw
the cause of my delay.”

“Yes, I recognized Mademoiselle Danglars. I was not aware that you were
so intimate with her.”

“Who told you we were intimate, Maximilian?”

“No one, but you appeared to be so. From the manner in which you walked
and talked together, one would have thought you were two school-girls
telling your secrets to each other.”

“We were having a confidential conversation,” returned Valentine; “she
was owning to me her repugnance to the marriage with M. de Morcerf; and
I, on the other hand, was confessing to her how wretched it made me to
think of marrying M. d’Épinay.”

“Dear Valentine!”

“That will account to you for the unreserved manner which you observed
between me and Eugénie, as in speaking of the man whom I could not
love, my thoughts involuntarily reverted to him on whom my affections
were fixed.”

“Ah, how good you are to say so, Valentine! You possess a quality which
can never belong to Mademoiselle Danglars. It is that indefinable charm
which is to a woman what perfume is to the flower and flavor to the
fruit, for the beauty of either is not the only quality we seek.”

“It is your love which makes you look upon everything in that light.”

“No, Valentine, I assure you such is not the case. I was observing you
both when you were walking in the garden, and, on my honor, without at
all wishing to depreciate the beauty of Mademoiselle Danglars, I cannot
understand how any man can really love her.”

“The fact is, Maximilian, that I was there, and my presence had the
effect of rendering you unjust in your comparison.”

“No; but tell me—it is a question of simple curiosity, and which was
suggested by certain ideas passing in my mind relative to Mademoiselle
Danglars——”

“I dare say it is something disparaging which you are going to say. It
only proves how little indulgence we may expect from your sex,”
interrupted Valentine.

“You cannot, at least, deny that you are very harsh judges of each
other.”

“If we are so, it is because we generally judge under the influence of
excitement. But return to your question.”

30151m



“Does Mademoiselle Danglars object to this marriage with M. de Morcerf
on account of loving another?”

“I told you I was not on terms of strict intimacy with Eugénie.”

“Yes, but girls tell each other secrets without being particularly
intimate; own, now, that you did question her on the subject. Ah, I see
you are smiling.”

“If you are already aware of the conversation that passed, the wooden
partition which interposed between us and you has proved but a slight
security.”

“Come, what did she say?”

“She told me that she loved no one,” said Valentine; “that she disliked
the idea of being married; that she would infinitely prefer leading an
independent and unfettered life; and that she almost wished her father
might lose his fortune, that she might become an artist, like her
friend, Mademoiselle Louise d’Armilly.”

“Ah, you see——”

“Well, what does that prove?” asked Valentine.

“Nothing,” replied Maximilian.

“Then why did you smile?”

“Why, you know very well that you are reflecting on yourself,
Valentine.”

“Do you want me to go away?”

“Ah, no, no. But do not let us lose time; you are the subject on which
I wish to speak.”

“True, we must be quick, for we have scarcely ten minutes more to pass
together.”

“_Ma foi!_” said Maximilian, in consternation.

“Yes, you are right; I am but a poor friend to you. What a life I cause
you to lead, poor Maximilian, you who are formed for happiness! I
bitterly reproach myself, I assure you.”

“Well, what does it signify, Valentine, so long as I am satisfied, and
feel that even this long and painful suspense is amply repaid by five
minutes of your society, or two words from your lips? And I have also a
deep conviction that heaven would not have created two hearts,
harmonizing as ours do, and almost miraculously brought us together, to
separate us at last.”

“Those are kind and cheering words. You must hope for us both,
Maximilian; that will make me at least partly happy.”

“But why must you leave me so soon?”

“I do not know particulars. I can only tell you that Madame de
Villefort sent to request my presence, as she had a communication to
make on which a part of my fortune depended. Let them take my fortune,
I am already too rich; and, perhaps, when they have taken it, they will
leave me in peace and quietness. You would love me as much if I were
poor, would you not, Maximilian?”

“Oh, I shall always love you. What should I care for either riches or
poverty, if my Valentine was near me, and I felt certain that no one
could deprive me of her? But do you not fear that this communication
may relate to your marriage?”

“I do not think that is the case.”

“However it may be, Valentine, you must not be alarmed. I assure you
that, as long as I live, I shall never love anyone else!”

“Do you think to reassure me when you say that, Maximilian?”

“Pardon me, you are right. I am a brute. But I was going to tell you
that I met M. de Morcerf the other day.”

“Well?”

“Monsieur Franz is his friend, you know.”

“What then?”

“Monsieur de Morcerf has received a letter from Franz, announcing his
immediate return.” Valentine turned pale, and leaned her hand against
the gate.

“Ah heavens, if it were that! But no, the communication would not come
through Madame de Villefort.”

“Why not?”

“Because—I scarcely know why—but it has appeared as if Madame de
Villefort secretly objected to the marriage, although she did not
choose openly to oppose it.”

“Is it so? Then I feel as if I could adore Madame de Villefort.”

“Do not be in such a hurry to do that,” said Valentine, with a sad
smile.

“If she objects to your marrying M. d’Épinay, she would be all the more
likely to listen to any other proposition.”

“No, Maximilian, it is not suitors to which Madame de Villefort
objects, it is marriage itself.”

“Marriage? If she dislikes that so much, why did she ever marry
herself?”

“You do not understand me, Maximilian. About a year ago, I talked of
retiring to a convent. Madame de Villefort, in spite of all the remarks
which she considered it her duty to make, secretly approved of the
proposition, my father consented to it at her instigation, and it was
only on account of my poor grandfather that I finally abandoned the
project. You can form no idea of the expression of that old man’s eye
when he looks at me, the only person in the world whom he loves, and, I
had almost said, by whom he is beloved in return. When he learned my
resolution, I shall never forget the reproachful look which he cast on
me, and the tears of utter despair which chased each other down his
lifeless cheeks. Ah, Maximilian, I experienced, at that moment, such
remorse for my intention, that, throwing myself at his feet, I
exclaimed,—‘Forgive me, pray forgive me, my dear grandfather; they may
do what they will with me, I will never leave you.