A ground floor,
ornamented with arabesques, bathing its terraces in the water, and
another floor, looking on the lake, was all which was visible to the
eye. But beneath the ground floor, stretching out into the island, was
a large subterranean cavern, to which my mother, myself, and the women
were conducted. In this place were together 60,000 pouches and 200
barrels; the pouches contained 25,000,000 of money in gold, and the
barrels were filled with 30,000 pounds of gunpowder.

“Near the barrels stood Selim, my father’s favorite, whom I mentioned
to you just now. He stood watch day and night with a lance provided
with a lighted slowmatch in his hand, and he had orders to blow up
everything—kiosk, guards, women, gold, and Ali Tepelini himself—at the
first signal given by my father. I remember well that the slaves,
convinced of the precarious tenure on which they held their lives,
passed whole days and nights in praying, crying, and groaning. As for
me, I can never forget the pale complexion and black eyes of the young
soldier, and whenever the angel of death summons me to another world, I
am quite sure I shall recognize Selim. I cannot tell you how long we
remained in this state; at that period I did not even know what time
meant. Sometimes, but very rarely, my father summoned me and my mother
to the terrace of the palace; these were hours of recreation for me, as
I never saw anything in the dismal cavern but the gloomy countenances
of the slaves and Selim’s fiery lance. My father was endeavoring to
pierce with his eager looks the remotest verge of the horizon,
examining attentively every black speck which appeared on the lake,
while my mother, reclining by his side, rested her head on his
shoulder, and I played at his feet, admiring everything I saw with that
unsophisticated innocence of childhood which throws a charm round
objects insignificant in themselves, but which in its eyes are invested
with the greatest importance. The heights of Pindus towered above us;
the castle of Yanina rose white and angular from the blue waters of the
lake, and the immense masses of black vegetation which, viewed in the
distance, gave the idea of lichens clinging to the rocks, were in
reality gigantic fir-trees and myrtles.

“One morning my father sent for us; my mother had been crying all the
night, and was very wretched; we found the pasha calm, but paler than
usual. ‘Take courage, Vasiliki,’ said he; ‘today arrives the firman of
the master, and my fate will be decided. If my pardon be complete, we
shall return triumphant to Yanina; if the news be inauspicious, we must
fly this night.’—‘But supposing our enemy should not allow us to do
so?’ said my mother. ‘Oh, make yourself easy on that head,’ said Ali,
smiling; ‘Selim and his flaming lance will settle that matter. They
would be glad to see me dead, but they would not like themselves to die
with me.’

“My mother only answered by sighs to consolations which she knew did
not come from my father’s heart. She prepared the iced water which he
was in the habit of constantly drinking,—for since his sojourn at the
kiosk he had been parched by the most violent fever,—after which she
anointed his white beard with perfumed oil, and lighted his chibouque,
which he sometimes smoked for hours together, quietly watching the
wreaths of vapor that ascended in spiral clouds and gradually melted
away in the surrounding atmosphere. Presently he made such a sudden
movement that I was paralyzed with fear. Then, without taking his eyes
from the object which had first attracted his attention, he asked for
his telescope. My mother gave it him, and as she did so, looked whiter
than the marble against which she leaned. I saw my father’s hand
tremble. ‘A boat!—two!—three!’ murmured my, father;—‘four!’ He then
arose, seizing his arms and priming his pistols. ‘Vasiliki,’ said he to
my mother, trembling perceptibly, ‘the instant approaches which will
decide everything. In the space of half an hour we shall know the
emperor’s answer. Go into the cavern with Haydée.’—‘I will not quit
you,’ said Vasiliki; ‘if you die, my lord, I will die with you.’—‘Go to
Selim!’ cried my father. ‘Adieu, my lord,’ murmured my mother,
determining quietly to await the approach of death. ‘Take away
Vasiliki!’ said my father to his Palikares.

“As for me, I had been forgotten in the general confusion; I ran toward
Ali Tepelini; he saw me hold out my arms to him, and he stooped down
and pressed my forehead with his lips. Oh, how distinctly I remember
that kiss!—it was the last he ever gave me, and I feel as if it were
still warm on my forehead. On descending, we saw through the
lattice-work several boats which were gradually becoming more distinct
to our view. At first they appeared like black specks, and now they
looked like birds skimming the surface of the waves. During this time,
in the kiosk at my father’s feet, were seated twenty Palikares,
concealed from view by an angle of the wall and watching with eager
eyes the arrival of the boats. They were armed with their long guns
inlaid with mother-of-pearl and silver, and cartridges in great numbers
were lying scattered on the floor. My father looked at his watch, and
paced up and down with a countenance expressive of the greatest
anguish. This was the scene which presented itself to my view as I
quitted my father after that last kiss.

“My mother and I traversed the gloomy passage leading to the cavern.
Selim was still at his post, and smiled sadly on us as we entered. We
fetched our cushions from the other end of the cavern, and sat down by
Selim. In great dangers the devoted ones cling to each other; and,
young as I was, I quite understood that some imminent danger was
hanging over our heads.”

Albert had often heard—not from his father, for he never spoke on the
subject, but from strangers—the description of the last moments of the
vizier of Yanina; he had read different accounts of his death, but the
story seemed to acquire fresh meaning from the voice and expression of
the young girl, and her sympathetic accent and the melancholy
expression of her countenance at once charmed and horrified him.

As to Haydée, these terrible reminiscences seemed to have overpowered
her for a moment, for she ceased speaking, her head leaning on her hand
like a beautiful flower bowing beneath the violence of the storm; and
her eyes gazing on vacancy indicated that she was mentally
contemplating the green summit of the Pindus and the blue waters of the
lake of Yanina, which, like a magic mirror, seemed to reflect the
sombre picture which she sketched. Monte Cristo looked at her with an
indescribable expression of interest and pity.

“Go on, my child,” said the count in the Romaic language.

40074m



Haydée looked up abruptly, as if the sonorous tones of Monte Cristo’s
voice had awakened her from a dream; and she resumed her narrative.

“It was about four o’clock in the afternoon, and although the day was
brilliant out-of-doors, we were enveloped in the gloomy darkness of the
cavern. One single, solitary light was burning there, and it appeared
like a star set in a heaven of blackness; it was Selim’s flaming lance.
My mother was a Christian, and she prayed. Selim repeated from time to
time the sacred words: ‘God is great!’ However, my mother had still
some hope. As she was coming down, she thought she recognized the
French officer who had been sent to Constantinople, and in whom my
father placed so much confidence; for he knew that all the soldiers of
the French emperor were naturally noble and generous. She advanced some
steps towards the staircase, and listened. ‘They are approaching,’ said
she; ‘perhaps they bring us peace and liberty!’

“‘What do you fear, Vasiliki?’ said Selim, in a voice at once so gentle
and yet so proud. ‘If they do not bring us peace, we will give them
war; if they do not bring life, we will give them death.’ And he
renewed the flame of his lance with a gesture which made one think of
Dionysus of old Crete.16 But I, being only a little child, was
terrified by this undaunted courage, which appeared to me both
ferocious and senseless, and I recoiled with horror from the idea of
the frightful death amidst fire and flames which probably awaited us.

“My mother experienced the same sensations, for I felt her tremble.
‘Mamma, mamma,’ said I, ‘are we really to be killed?’ And at the sound
of my voice the slaves redoubled their cries and prayers and
lamentations. ‘My child,’ said Vasiliki, ‘may God preserve you from
ever wishing for that death which today you so much dread!’ Then,
whispering to Selim, she asked what were her master’s orders. ‘If he
send me his poniard, it will signify that the emperor’s intentions are
not favorable, and I am to set fire to the powder; if, on the contrary,
he send me his ring, it will be a sign that the emperor pardons him,
and I am to extinguish the match and leave the magazine untouched.’—‘My
friend,’ said my mother, ‘when your master’s orders arrive, if it is
the poniard which he sends, instead of despatching us by that horrible
death which we both so much dread, you will mercifully kill us with
this same poniard, will you not?’—‘Yes, Vasiliki,’ replied Selim
tranquilly.

“Suddenly we heard loud cries; and, listening, discerned that they were
cries of joy. The name of the French officer who had been sent to
Constantinople resounded on all sides amongst our Palikares; it was
evident that he brought the answer of the emperor, and that it was
favorable.”

“And do you not remember the Frenchman’s name?” said Morcerf, quite
ready to aid the memory of the narrator. Monte Cristo made a sign to
him to be silent.

“I do not recollect it,” said Haydée.

“The noise increased; steps were heard approaching nearer and nearer;
they were descending the steps leading to the cavern. Selim made ready
his lance.