”

“How attentively he looked at you.”

“At me?”

“Yes.”

Albert reflected. “Ah,” replied he, sighing, “that is not very
surprising; I have been more than a year absent from Paris, and my
clothes are of a most antiquated cut; the count takes me for a
provincial. The first opportunity you have, undeceive him, I beg, and
tell him I am nothing of the kind.”

Franz smiled; an instant after the count entered.

“I am now quite at your service, gentlemen,” said he. “The carriage is
going one way to the Piazza del Popolo, and we will go another; and, if
you please, by the Corso. Take some more of these cigars, M. de
Morcerf.”

“With all my heart,” returned Albert; “Italian cigars are horrible.
When you come to Paris, I will return all this.”

“I will not refuse; I intend going there soon, and since you allow me,
I will pay you a visit. Come, we have not any time to lose, it is
half-past twelve—let us set off.”

All three descended; the coachman received his master’s orders, and
drove down the Via del Babuino. While the three gentlemen walked along
the Piazza di Spagna and the Via Frattina, which led directly between
the Fiano and Rospoli palaces, Franz’s attention was directed towards
the windows of that last palace, for he had not forgotten the signal
agreed upon between the man in the mantle and the Transtevere peasant.

“Which are your windows?” asked he of the count, with as much
indifference as he could assume.

“The three last,” returned he, with a negligence evidently unaffected,
for he could not imagine with what intention the question was put.

Franz glanced rapidly towards the three windows. The side windows were
hung with yellow damask, and the centre one with white damask and a red
cross. The man in the mantle had kept his promise to the Transteverin,
and there could now be no doubt that he was the count.

The three windows were still untenanted. Preparations were making on
every side; chairs were placed, scaffolds were raised, and windows were
hung with flags. The masks could not appear; the carriages could not
move about; but the masks were visible behind the windows, the
carriages, and the doors.

Franz, Albert, and the count continued to descend the Corso. As they
approached the Piazza del Popolo, the crowd became more dense, and
above the heads of the multitude two objects were visible: the obelisk,
surmounted by a cross, which marks the centre of the square, and in
front of the obelisk, at the point where the three streets, del
Babuino, del Corso, and di Ripetta, meet, the two uprights of the
scaffold, between which glittered the curved knife of the _mandaïa_.

At the corner of the street they met the count’s steward, who was
awaiting his master. The window, let at an exorbitant price, which the
count had doubtless wished to conceal from his guests, was on the
second floor of the great palace, situated between the Via del Babuino
and the Monte Pincio. It consisted, as we have said, of a small
dressing-room, opening into a bedroom, and, when the door of
communication was shut, the inmates were quite alone. On chairs were
laid elegant masquerade costumes of blue and white satin.

20167m



“As you left the choice of your costumes to me,” said the count to the
two friends, “I have had these brought, as they will be the most worn
this year; and they are most suitable, on account of the _confetti_
(sweetmeats), as they do not show the flour.”

Franz heard the words of the count but imperfectly, and he perhaps did
not fully appreciate this new attention to their wishes; for he was
wholly absorbed by the spectacle that the Piazza del Popolo presented,
and by the terrible instrument that was in the centre.

It was the first time Franz had ever seen a guillotine,—we say
guillotine, because the Roman _mandaïa_ is formed on almost the same
model as the French instrument.7 The knife, which is shaped like a
crescent, that cuts with the convex side, falls from a less height, and
that is all the difference.

Two men, seated on the movable plank on which the victim is laid, were
eating their breakfasts, while waiting for the criminal. Their repast
consisted apparently of bread and sausages. One of them lifted the
plank, took out a flask of wine, drank some, and then passed it to his
companion. These two men were the executioner’s assistants.

At this sight Franz felt the perspiration start forth upon his brow.

The prisoners, transported the previous evening from the Carceri Nuove
to the little church of Santa Maria del Popolo, had passed the night,
each accompanied by two priests, in a chapel closed by a grating,
before which were two sentinels, who were relieved at intervals. A
double line of carbineers, placed on each side of the door of the
church, reached to the scaffold, and formed a circle around it, leaving
a path about ten feet wide, and around the guillotine a space of nearly
a hundred feet.

All the rest of the square was paved with heads. Many women held their
infants on their shoulders, and thus the children had the best view.
The Monte Pincio seemed a vast amphitheatre filled with spectators; the
balconies of the two churches at the corner of the Via del Babuino and
the Via di Ripetta were crammed; the steps even seemed a parti-colored
sea, that was impelled towards the portico; every niche in the wall
held its living statue. What the count said was true—the most curious
spectacle in life is that of death.

And yet, instead of the silence and the solemnity demanded by the
occasion, laughter and jests arose from the crowd. It was evident that
the execution was, in the eyes of the people, only the commencement of
the Carnival.

Suddenly the tumult ceased, as if by magic, and the doors of the church
opened. A brotherhood of penitents, clothed from head to foot in robes
of gray sackcloth, with holes for the eyes, and holding in their hands
lighted tapers, appeared first; the chief marched at the head.

20169m



Behind the penitents came a man of vast stature and proportions. He was
naked, with the exception of cloth drawers at the left side of which
hung a large knife in a sheath, and he bore on his right shoulder a
heavy iron sledge-hammer.

This man was the executioner.

He had, moreover, sandals bound on his feet by cords.

Behind the executioner came, in the order in which they were to die,
first Peppino and then Andrea. Each was accompanied by two priests.
Neither had his eyes bandaged.

Peppino walked with a firm step, doubtless aware of what awaited him.
Andrea was supported by two priests. Each of them, from time to time,
kissed the crucifix a confessor held out to them.

At this sight alone Franz felt his legs tremble under him. He looked at
Albert—he was as white as his shirt, and mechanically cast away his
cigar, although he had not half smoked it. The count alone seemed
unmoved—nay, more, a slight color seemed striving to rise in his pale
cheeks. His nostrils dilated like those of a wild beast that scents its
prey, and his lips, half opened, disclosed his white teeth, small and
sharp like those of a jackal. And yet his features wore an expression
of smiling tenderness, such as Franz had never before witnessed in
them; his black eyes especially were full of kindness and pity.

However, the two culprits advanced, and as they approached their faces
became visible. Peppino was a handsome young man of four or
five-and-twenty, bronzed by the sun; he carried his head erect, and
seemed on the watch to see on which side his liberator would appear.
Andrea was short and fat; his visage, marked with brutal cruelty, did
not indicate age; he might be thirty. In prison he had suffered his
beard to grow; his head fell on his shoulder, his legs bent beneath
him, and his movements were apparently automatic and unconscious.

“I thought,” said Franz to the count, “that you told me there would be
but one execution.”

“I told you true,” replied he coldly.

“And yet here are two culprits.”

“Yes; but only one of these two is about to die; the other has many
years to live.”

“If the pardon is to come, there is no time to lose.”

“And see, here it is,” said the count. At the moment when Peppino
reached the foot of the _mandaïa_, a priest arrived in some haste,
forced his way through the soldiers, and, advancing to the chief of the
brotherhood, gave him a folded paper. The piercing eye of Peppino had
noticed all. The chief took the paper, unfolded it, and, raising his
hand, “Heaven be praised, and his Holiness also,” said he in a loud
voice; “here is a pardon for one of the prisoners!”

“A pardon!” cried the people with one voice; “a pardon!”

At this cry Andrea raised his head.

“Pardon for whom?” cried he.

Peppino remained breathless.

“A pardon for Peppino, called Rocca Priori,” said the principal friar.
And he passed the paper to the officer commanding the carbineers, who
read and returned it to him.

“For Peppino!” cried Andrea, who seemed roused from the torpor in which
he had been plunged. “Why for him and not for me? We ought to die
together. I was promised he should die with me. You have no right to
put me to death alone. I will not die alone—I will not!”

And he broke from the priests struggling and raving like a wild beast,
and striving desperately to break the cords that bound his hands. The
executioner made a sign, and his two assistants leaped from the
scaffold and seized him.

“What is going on?” asked Franz of the count; for, as all the talk was
in the Roman dialect, he had not perfectly understood it.

“Do you not see?” returned the count, “that this human creature who is
about to die is furious that his fellow-sufferer does not perish with
him? and, were he able, he would rather tear him to pieces with his
teeth and nails than let him enjoy the life he himself is about to be
deprived of. Oh, man, man—race of crocodiles,” cried the count,
extending his clenched hands towards the crowd, “how well do I
recognize you there, and that at all times you are worthy of
yourselves!