“How can I, if her husband fails in controlling her?” asked Lucien;
“you know the character of the baroness—no one has any influence with
her, and she does precisely what she pleases.”

“Ah, if I were in your place——” said Albert.

“Well?”

“I would reform her; it would be rendering a service to her future
son-in-law.”

“How would you set about it?”

“Ah, that would be easy enough—I would give her a lesson.”

“A lesson?”

“Yes. Your position as secretary to the minister renders your authority
great on the subject of political news; you never open your mouth but
the stockbrokers immediately stenograph your words. Cause her to lose a
hundred thousand francs, and that would teach her prudence.”

“I do not understand,” stammered Lucien.

“It is very clear, notwithstanding,” replied the young man, with an
artlessness wholly free from affectation; “tell her some fine morning
an unheard-of piece of intelligence—some telegraphic despatch, of which
you alone are in possession; for instance, that Henri IV. was seen
yesterday at Gabrielle’s. That would boom the market; she will buy
heavily, and she will certainly lose when Beauchamp announces the
following day, in his gazette, ‘The report circulated by some usually
well-informed persons that the king was seen yesterday at Gabrielle’s
house, is totally without foundation. We can positively assert that his
majesty did not quit the Pont-Neuf.’”

Lucien half smiled. Monte Cristo, although apparently indifferent, had
not lost one word of this conversation, and his penetrating eye had
even read a hidden secret in the embarrassed manner of the secretary.
This embarrassment had completely escaped Albert, but it caused Lucien
to shorten his visit; he was evidently ill at ease. The count, in
taking leave of him, said something in a low voice, to which he
answered, “Willingly, count; I accept.” The count returned to young
Morcerf.

“Do you not think, on reflection,” said he to him, “that you have done
wrong in thus speaking of your mother-in-law in the presence of M.
Debray?”

“My dear count,” said Morcerf, “I beg of you not to apply that title so
prematurely.”

“Now, speaking without any exaggeration, is your mother really so very
much averse to this marriage?”

“So much so that the baroness very rarely comes to the house, and my
mother, has not, I think, visited Madame Danglars twice in her whole
life.”

“Then,” said the count, “I am emboldened to speak openly to you. M.
Danglars is my banker; M. de Villefort has overwhelmed me with
politeness in return for a service which a casual piece of good fortune
enabled me to render him. I predict from all this an avalanche of
dinners and routs. Now, in order not to presume on this, and also to be
beforehand with them, I have, if agreeable to you, thought of inviting
M. and Madame Danglars, and M. and Madame de Villefort, to my
country-house at Auteuil. If I were to invite you and the Count and
Countess of Morcerf to this dinner, I should give it the appearance of
being a matrimonial meeting, or at least Madame de Morcerf would look
upon the affair in that light, especially if Baron Danglars did me the
honor to bring his daughter. In that case your mother would hold me in
aversion, and I do not at all wish that; on the contrary, I desire to
stand high in her esteem.”

“Indeed, count,” said Morcerf, “I thank you sincerely for having used
so much candor towards me, and I gratefully accept the exclusion which
you propose. You say you desire my mother’s good opinion; I assure you
it is already yours to a very unusual extent.”

30111m



“Do you think so?” said Monte Cristo, with interest.

“Oh, I am sure of it; we talked of you an hour after you left us the
other day. But to return to what we were saying. If my mother could
know of this attention on your part—and I will venture to tell her—I am
sure that she will be most grateful to you; it is true that my father
will be equally angry.” The count laughed.

“Well,” said he to Morcerf, “but I think your father will not be the
only angry one; M. and Madame Danglars will think me a very
ill-mannered person. They know that I am intimate with you—that you
are, in fact; one of the oldest of my Parisian acquaintances—and they
will not find you at my house; they will certainly ask me why I did not
invite you. Be sure to provide yourself with some previous engagement
which shall have a semblance of probability, and communicate the fact
to me by a line in writing. You know that with bankers nothing but a
written document will be valid.”

“I will do better than that,” said Albert; “my mother is wishing to go
to the sea-side—what day is fixed for your dinner?”

“Saturday.”

“This is Tuesday—well, tomorrow evening we leave, and the day after we
shall be at Tréport. Really, count, you have a delightful way of
setting people at their ease.”

“Indeed, you give me more credit than I deserve; I only wish to do what
will be agreeable to you, that is all.”

“When shall you send your invitations?”

“This very day.”

“Well, I will immediately call on M. Danglars, and tell him that my
mother and myself must leave Paris tomorrow. I have not seen you,
consequently I know nothing of your dinner.”

“How foolish you are! Have you forgotten that M. Debray has just seen
you at my house?”

“Ah, true.”

“Fix it this way. I have seen you, and invited you without any
ceremony, when you instantly answered that it would be impossible for
you to accept, as you were going to Tréport.”

“Well, then, that is settled; but you will come and call on my mother
before tomorrow?”

“Before tomorrow?—that will be a difficult matter to arrange, besides,
I shall just be in the way of all the preparations for departure.”

“Well, you can do better. You were only a charming man before, but, if
you accede to my proposal, you will be adorable.”

“What must I do to attain such sublimity?”

“You are today free as air—come and dine with me; we shall be a small
party—only yourself, my mother, and I. You have scarcely seen my
mother; you shall have an opportunity of observing her more closely.
She is a remarkable woman, and I only regret that there does not exist
another like her, about twenty years younger; in that case, I assure
you, there would very soon be a Countess and Viscountess of Morcerf. As
to my father, you will not see him; he is officially engaged, and dines
with the chief referendary. We will talk over our travels; and you, who
have seen the whole world, will relate your adventures—you shall tell
us the history of the beautiful Greek who was with you the other night
at the Opera, and whom you call your slave, and yet treat like a
princess. We will talk Italian and Spanish. Come, accept my invitation,
and my mother will thank you.”

“A thousand thanks,” said the count, “your invitation is most gracious,
and I regret exceedingly that it is not in my power to accept it. I am
not so much at liberty as you suppose; on the contrary, I have a most
important engagement.”

“Ah, take care, you were teaching me just now how, in case of an
invitation to dinner, one might creditably make an excuse. I require
the proof of a pre-engagement. I am not a banker, like M. Danglars, but
I am quite as incredulous as he is.”

“I am going to give you a proof,” replied the count, and he rang the
bell.

“Humph,” said Morcerf, “this is the second time you have refused to
dine with my mother; it is evident that you wish to avoid her.”

Monte Cristo started. “Oh, you do not mean that,” said he; “besides,
here comes the confirmation of my assertion.”

Baptistin entered, and remained standing at the door.

“I had no previous knowledge of your visit, had I?”

“Indeed, you are such an extraordinary person, that I would not answer
for it.”

“At all events, I could not guess that you would invite me to dinner.”

“Probably not.”

“Well, listen, Baptistin, what did I tell you this morning when I
called you into my laboratory?”

“To close the door against visitors as soon as the clock struck five,”
replied the valet.

“What then?”

“Ah, my dear count,” said Albert.

“No, no, I wish to do away with that mysterious reputation that you
have given me, my dear viscount; it is tiresome to be always acting
Manfred. I wish my life to be free and open. Go on, Baptistin.”

“Then to admit no one except Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti and his son.”

“You hear—Major Bartolomeo Cavalcanti—a man who ranks amongst the most
ancient nobility of Italy, whose name Dante has celebrated in the tenth
canto of _The Inferno_, you remember it, do you not? Then there is his
son, Andrea, a charming young man, about your own age, viscount,
bearing the same title as yourself, and who is making his entry into
the Parisian world, aided by his father’s millions. The major will
bring his son with him this evening, the _contino_, as we say in Italy;
he confides him to my care. If he proves himself worthy of it, I will
do what I can to advance his interests. You will assist me in the work,
will you not?”

“Most undoubtedly. This Major Cavalcanti is an old friend of yours,
then?”

“By no means. He is a perfect nobleman, very polite, modest, and
agreeable, such as may be found constantly in Italy, descendants of
very ancient families. I have met him several times at Florence,
Bologna and Lucca, and he has now communicated to me the fact of his
arrival in Paris. The acquaintances one makes in travelling have a sort
of claim on one; they everywhere expect to receive the same attention
which you once paid them by chance, as though the civilities of a
passing hour were likely to awaken any lasting interest in favor of the
man in whose society you may happen to be thrown in the course of your
journey. This good Major Cavalcanti is come to take a second view of
Paris, which he only saw in passing through in the time of the Empire,
when he was on his way to Moscow.