”

“Nonsense,” returned Danglars, “I tell you again I have nothing
whatever to do with it; besides, you know very well that I tore the
paper to pieces.”

“No, you did not!” answered Caderousse, “you merely threw it by—I saw
it lying in a corner.”

“Hold your tongue, you fool!—what should you know about it?—why, you
were drunk!”

“Where is Fernand?” inquired Caderousse.

“How do I know?” replied Danglars; “gone, as every prudent man ought to
be, to look after his own affairs, most likely. Never mind where he is,
let you and I go and see what is to be done for our poor friends.”

During this conversation, Dantès, after having exchanged a cheerful
shake of the hand with all his sympathizing friends, had surrendered
himself to the officer sent to arrest him, merely saying, “Make
yourselves quite easy, my good fellows, there is some little mistake to
clear up, that’s all, depend upon it; and very likely I may not have to
go so far as the prison to effect that.”

0075m



“Oh, to be sure!” responded Danglars, who had now approached the group,
“nothing more than a mistake, I feel quite certain.”

Dantès descended the staircase, preceded by the magistrate, and
followed by the soldiers. A carriage awaited him at the door; he got
in, followed by two soldiers and the magistrate, and the vehicle drove
off towards Marseilles.

“Adieu, adieu, dearest Edmond!” cried Mercédès, stretching out her arms
to him from the balcony.

The prisoner heard the cry, which sounded like the sob of a broken
heart, and leaning from the coach he called out, “Good-bye, Mercédès—we
shall soon meet again!” Then the vehicle disappeared round one of the
turnings of Fort Saint Nicholas.

“Wait for me here, all of you!” cried M. Morrel; “I will take the first
conveyance I find, and hurry to Marseilles, whence I will bring you
word how all is going on.”

“That’s right!” exclaimed a multitude of voices, “go, and return as
quickly as you can!”

This second departure was followed by a long and fearful state of
terrified silence on the part of those who were left behind. The old
father and Mercédès remained for some time apart, each absorbed in
grief; but at length the two poor victims of the same blow raised their
eyes, and with a simultaneous burst of feeling rushed into each other’s
arms.

Meanwhile Fernand made his appearance, poured out for himself a glass
of water with a trembling hand; then hastily swallowing it, went to sit
down at the first vacant place, and this was, by mere chance, placed
next to the seat on which poor Mercédès had fallen half fainting, when
released from the warm and affectionate embrace of old Dantès.
Instinctively Fernand drew back his chair.

“He is the cause of all this misery—I am quite sure of it,” whispered
Caderousse, who had never taken his eyes off Fernand, to Danglars.

“I don’t think so,” answered the other; “he’s too stupid to imagine
such a scheme. I only hope the mischief will fall upon the head of
whoever wrought it.”

“You don’t mention those who aided and abetted the deed,” said
Caderousse.

“Surely,” answered Danglars, “one cannot be held responsible for every
chance arrow shot into the air.”

“You can, indeed, when the arrow lights point downward on somebody’s
head.”

Meantime the subject of the arrest was being canvassed in every
different form.

“What think you, Danglars,” said one of the party, turning towards him,
“of this event?”

“Why,” replied he, “I think it just possible Dantès may have been
detected with some trifling article on board ship considered here as
contraband.”

“But how could he have done so without your knowledge, Danglars, since
you are the ship’s supercargo?”

“Why, as for that, I could only know what I was told respecting the
merchandise with which the vessel was laden. I know she was loaded with
cotton, and that she took in her freight at Alexandria from Pastret’s
warehouse, and at Smyrna from Pascal’s; that is all I was obliged to
know, and I beg I may not be asked for any further particulars.”

“Now I recollect,” said the afflicted old father; “my poor boy told me
yesterday he had got a small case of coffee, and another of tobacco for
me!”

“There, you see,” exclaimed Danglars. “Now the mischief is out; depend
upon it the custom-house people went rummaging about the ship in our
absence, and discovered poor Dantès’ hidden treasures.”

Mercédès, however, paid no heed to this explanation of her lover’s
arrest. Her grief, which she had hitherto tried to restrain, now burst
out in a violent fit of hysterical sobbing.

“Come, come,” said the old man, “be comforted, my poor child; there is
still hope!”

“Hope!” repeated Danglars.

“Hope!” faintly murmured Fernand, but the word seemed to die away on
his pale agitated lips, and a convulsive spasm passed over his
countenance.

“Good news! good news!” shouted forth one of the party stationed in the
balcony on the lookout. “Here comes M. Morrel back. No doubt, now, we
shall hear that our friend is released!”

Mercédès and the old man rushed to meet the shipowner and greeted him
at the door. He was very pale.

“What news?” exclaimed a general burst of voices.

“Alas, my friends,” replied M. Morrel, with a mournful shake of his
head, “the thing has assumed a more serious aspect than I expected.”

“Oh, indeed—indeed, sir, he is innocent!” sobbed forth Mercédès.

“That I believe!” answered M. Morrel; “but still he is charged——”

“With what?” inquired the elder Dantès.

“With being an agent of the Bonapartist faction!” Many of our readers
may be able to recollect how formidable such an accusation became in
the period at which our story is dated.

A despairing cry escaped the pale lips of Mercédès; the old man sank
into a chair.

“Ah, Danglars!” whispered Caderousse, “you have deceived me—the trick
you spoke of last night has been played; but I cannot suffer a poor old
man or an innocent girl to die of grief through your fault. I am
determined to tell them all about it.”

“Be silent, you simpleton!” cried Danglars, grasping him by the arm,
“or I will not answer even for your own safety. Who can tell whether
Dantès be innocent or guilty? The vessel did touch at Elba, where he
quitted it, and passed a whole day in the island. Now, should any
letters or other documents of a compromising character be found upon
him, will it not be taken for granted that all who uphold him are his
accomplices?”

With the rapid instinct of selfishness, Caderousse readily perceived
the solidity of this mode of reasoning; he gazed, doubtfully,
wistfully, on Danglars, and then caution supplanted generosity.

“Suppose we wait a while, and see what comes of it,” said he, casting a
bewildered look on his companion.

“To be sure!” answered Danglars. “Let us wait, by all means. If he be
innocent, of course he will be set at liberty; if guilty, why, it is no
use involving ourselves in a conspiracy.”

“Let us go, then. I cannot stay here any longer.”

“With all my heart!” replied Danglars, pleased to find the other so
tractable. “Let us take ourselves out of the way, and leave things for
the present to take their course.”

After their departure, Fernand, who had now again become the friend and
protector of Mercédès, led the girl to her home, while some friends of
Dantès conducted his father, nearly lifeless, to the Allées de Meilhan.

The rumor of Edmond’s arrest as a Bonapartist agent was not slow in
circulating throughout the city.

“Could you ever have credited such a thing, my dear Danglars?” asked M.
Morrel, as, on his return to the port for the purpose of gleaning fresh
tidings of Dantès, from M. de Villefort, the assistant procureur, he
overtook his supercargo and Caderousse. “Could you have believed such a
thing possible?”

“Why, you know I told you,” replied Danglars, “that I considered the
circumstance of his having anchored at the Island of Elba as a very
suspicious circumstance.”

“And did you mention these suspicions to any person beside myself?”

0079m



“Certainly not!” returned Danglars. Then added in a low whisper, “You
understand that, on account of your uncle, M. Policar Morrel, who
served under the _other_ government, and who does not altogether
conceal what he thinks on the subject, you are strongly suspected of
regretting the abdication of Napoleon. I should have feared to injure
both Edmond and yourself, had I divulged my own apprehensions to a
soul. I am too well aware that though a subordinate, like myself, is
bound to acquaint the shipowner with everything that occurs, there are
many things he ought most carefully to conceal from all else.”

“’Tis well, Danglars—’tis well!” replied M. Morrel. “You are a worthy
fellow; and I had already thought of your interests in the event of
poor Edmond having become captain of the _Pharaon_.”

“Is it possible you were so kind?”

“Yes, indeed; I had previously inquired of Dantès what was his opinion
of you, and if he should have any reluctance to continue you in your
post, for somehow I have perceived a sort of coolness between you.”

“And what was his reply?”

“That he certainly did think he had given you offence in an affair
which he merely referred to without entering into particulars, but that
whoever possessed the good opinion and confidence of the ship’s owners
would have his preference also.”

“The hypocrite!” murmured Danglars.

“Poor Dantès!” said Caderousse. “No one can deny his being a
noble-hearted young fellow.”

“But meanwhile,” continued M. Morrel, “here is the _Pharaon_ without a
captain.”

“Oh,” replied Danglars, “since we cannot leave this port for the next
three months, let us hope that ere the expiration of that period Dantès
will be set at liberty.”

“No doubt; but in the meantime?”

“I am entirely at your service, M. Morrel,” answered Danglars. “You
know that I am as capable of managing a ship as the most experienced
captain in the service; and it will be so far advantageous to you to
accept my services, that upon Edmond’s release from prison no further
change will be requisite on board the _Pharaon_ than for Dantès and
myself each to resume our respective posts.