Dantès, as we have said, had traced the marks along the rocks, and he
had noticed that they led to a small creek, which was hidden like the
bath of some ancient nymph. This creek was sufficiently wide at its
mouth, and deep in the centre, to admit of the entrance of a small
vessel of the lugger class, which would be perfectly concealed from
observation.

Then following the clew that, in the hands of the Abbé Faria, had been
so skilfully used to guide him through the Dædalian labyrinth of
probabilities, he thought that the Cardinal Spada, anxious not to be
watched, had entered the creek, concealed his little barque, followed
the line marked by the notches in the rock, and at the end of it had
buried his treasure. It was this idea that had brought Dantès back to
the circular rock. One thing only perplexed Edmond, and destroyed his
theory. How could this rock, which weighed several tons, have been
lifted to this spot, without the aid of many men?

Suddenly an idea flashed across his mind. Instead of raising it,
thought he, they have lowered it. And he sprang from the rock in order
to inspect the base on which it had formerly stood.

He soon perceived that a slope had been formed, and the rock had slid
along this until it stopped at the spot it now occupied. A large stone
had served as a wedge; flints and pebbles had been inserted around it,
so as to conceal the orifice; this species of masonry had been covered
with earth, and grass and weeds had grown there, moss had clung to the
stones, myrtle-bushes had taken root, and the old rock seemed fixed to
the earth.

0301m



Dantès dug away the earth carefully, and detected, or fancied he
detected, the ingenious artifice. He attacked this wall, cemented by
the hand of time, with his pickaxe. After ten minutes’ labor the wall
gave way, and a hole large enough to insert the arm was opened.

Dantès went and cut the strongest olive-tree he could find, stripped
off its branches, inserted it in the hole, and used it as a lever. But
the rock was too heavy, and too firmly wedged, to be moved by anyone
man, were he Hercules himself. Dantès saw that he must attack the
wedge. But how?

He cast his eyes around, and saw the horn full of powder which his
friend Jacopo had left him. He smiled; the infernal invention would
serve him for this purpose.

With the aid of his pickaxe, Dantès, after the manner of a labor-saving
pioneer, dug a mine between the upper rock and the one that supported
it, filled it with powder, then made a match by rolling his
handkerchief in saltpetre. He lighted it and retired.

The explosion soon followed; the upper rock was lifted from its base by
the terrific force of the powder; the lower one flew into pieces;
thousands of insects escaped from the aperture Dantès had previously
formed, and a huge snake, like the guardian demon of the treasure,
rolled himself along in darkening coils, and disappeared.

Dantès approached the upper rock, which now, without any support,
leaned towards the sea. The intrepid treasure-seeker walked round it,
and, selecting the spot from whence it appeared most susceptible to
attack, placed his lever in one of the crevices, and strained every
nerve to move the mass.

The rock, already shaken by the explosion, tottered on its base. Dantès
redoubled his efforts; he seemed like one of the ancient Titans, who
uprooted the mountains to hurl against the father of the gods. The rock
yielded, rolled over, bounded from point to point, and finally
disappeared in the ocean.

On the spot it had occupied was a circular space, exposing an iron ring
let into a square flag-stone.

Dantès uttered a cry of joy and surprise; never had a first attempt
been crowned with more perfect success. He would fain have continued,
but his knees trembled, and his heart beat so violently, and his sight
became so dim, that he was forced to pause.

This feeling lasted but for a moment. Edmond inserted his lever in the
ring and exerted all his strength; the flag-stone yielded, and
disclosed steps that descended until they were lost in the obscurity of
a subterraneous grotto.

Anyone else would have rushed on with a cry of joy. Dantès turned pale,
hesitated, and reflected.

“Come,” said he to himself, “be a man. I am accustomed to adversity. I
must not be cast down by the discovery that I have been deceived. What,
then, would be the use of all I have suffered? The heart breaks when,
after having been elated by flattering hopes, it sees all its illusions
destroyed. Faria has dreamed this; the Cardinal Spada buried no
treasure here; perhaps he never came here, or if he did, Cæsar Borgia,
the intrepid adventurer, the stealthy and indefatigable plunderer, has
followed him, discovered his traces, pursued them as I have done,
raised the stone, and descending before me, has left me nothing.”

He remained motionless and pensive, his eyes fixed on the gloomy
aperture that was open at his feet.

“Now that I expect nothing, now that I no longer entertain the
slightest hopes, the end of this adventure becomes simply a matter of
curiosity.” And he remained again motionless and thoughtful.

“Yes, yes; this is an adventure worthy a place in the varied career of
that royal bandit. This fabulous event formed but a link in a long
chain of marvels. Yes, Borgia has been here, a torch in one hand, a
sword in the other, and within twenty paces, at the foot of this rock,
perhaps two guards kept watch on land and sea, while their master
descended, as I am about to descend, dispelling the darkness before his
awe-inspiring progress.”

0303m



“But what was the fate of the guards who thus possessed his secret?”
asked Dantès of himself.

“The fate,” replied he, smiling, “of those who buried Alaric, and were
interred with the corpse.”

“Yet, had he come,” thought Dantès, “he would have found the treasure,
and Borgia, he who compared Italy to an artichoke, which he could
devour leaf by leaf, knew too well the value of time to waste it in
replacing this rock. I will go down.”

Then he descended, a smile on his lips, and murmuring that last word of
human philosophy, “Perhaps!”

But instead of the darkness, and the thick and mephitic atmosphere he
had expected to find, Dantès saw a dim and bluish light, which, as well
as the air, entered, not merely by the aperture he had just formed, but
by the interstices and crevices of the rock which were visible from
without, and through which he could distinguish the blue sky and the
waving branches of the evergreen oaks, and the tendrils of the creepers
that grew from the rocks.

After having stood a few minutes in the cavern, the atmosphere of which
was rather warm than damp, Dantès’ eye, habituated as it was to
darkness, could pierce even to the remotest angles of the cavern, which
was of granite that sparkled like diamonds.

“Alas,” said Edmond, smiling, “these are the treasures the cardinal has
left; and the good abbé, seeing in a dream these glittering walls, has
indulged in fallacious hopes.”

But he called to mind the words of the will, which he knew by heart.
“In the farthest angle of the second opening,” said the cardinal’s
will. He had only found the first grotto; he had now to seek the
second. Dantès continued his search. He reflected that this second
grotto must penetrate deeper into the island; he examined the stones,
and sounded one part of the wall where he fancied the opening existed,
masked for precaution’s sake.

The pickaxe struck for a moment with a dull sound that drew out of
Dantès’ forehead large drops of perspiration. At last it seemed to him
that one part of the wall gave forth a more hollow and deeper echo; he
eagerly advanced, and with the quickness of perception that no one but
a prisoner possesses, saw that there, in all probability, the opening
must be.

However, he, like Cæsar Borgia, knew the value of time; and, in order
to avoid fruitless toil, he sounded all the other walls with his
pickaxe, struck the earth with the butt of his gun, and finding nothing
that appeared suspicious, returned to that part of the wall whence
issued the consoling sound he had before heard.

He again struck it, and with greater force. Then a singular thing
occurred. As he struck the wall, pieces of stucco similar to that used
in the ground work of arabesques broke off, and fell to the ground in
flakes, exposing a large white stone. The aperture of the rock had been
closed with stones, then this stucco had been applied, and painted to
imitate granite. Dantès struck with the sharp end of his pickaxe, which
entered someway between the interstices.

It was there he must dig.

But by some strange play of emotion, in proportion as the proofs that
Faria, had not been deceived became stronger, so did his heart give
way, and a feeling of discouragement stole over him. This last proof,
instead of giving him fresh strength, deprived him of it; the pickaxe
descended, or rather fell; he placed it on the ground, passed his hand
over his brow, and remounted the stairs, alleging to himself, as an
excuse, a desire to be assured that no one was watching him, but in
reality because he felt that he was about to faint.

The island was deserted, and the sun seemed to cover it with its fiery
glance; afar off, a few small fishing boats studded the bosom of the
blue ocean.

Dantès had tasted nothing, but he thought not of hunger at such a
moment; he hastily swallowed a few drops of rum, and again entered the
cavern.

The pickaxe that had seemed so heavy, was now like a feather in his
grasp; he seized it, and attacked the wall. After several blows he
perceived that the stones were not cemented, but had been merely placed
one upon the other, and covered with stucco; he inserted the point of
his pickaxe, and using the handle as a lever, with joy soon saw the
stone turn as if on hinges, and fall at his feet.