”70

Then Arete told her maids to set a large tripod upon the fire as fast
as they could, whereon they set a tripod full of bath water on to a
clear fire; they threw on sticks to make it blaze, and the water became
hot as the flame played about the belly of the tripod.71 Meanwhile
Arete brought a magnificent chest from her own room, and inside it she
packed all the beautiful presents of gold and raiment which the
Phaeacians had brought. Lastly she added a cloak and a good shirt from
Alcinous, and said to Ulysses:

“See to the lid yourself, and have the whole bound round at once, for
fear any one should rob you by the way when you are asleep in your
ship.” 72

When Ulysses heard this he put the lid on the chest and made it fast
with a bond that Circe had taught him. He had done so before an upper
servant told him to come to the bath and wash himself. He was very glad
of a warm bath, for he had had no one to wait upon him ever since he
left the house of Calypso, who as long as he remained with her had
taken as good care of him as though he had been a god. When the
servants had done washing and anointing him with oil, and had given him
a clean cloak and shirt, he left the bath room and joined the guests
who were sitting over their wine. Lovely Nausicaa stood by one of the
bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister, and admired him as
she saw him pass. “Farewell stranger,” said she, “do not forget me when
you are safe at home again, for it is to me first that you owe a ransom
for having saved your life.”

And Ulysses said, “Nausicaa, daughter of great Alcinous, may Jove the
mighty husband of Juno, grant that I may reach my home; so shall I
bless you as my guardian angel all my days, for it was you who saved
me.”

When he had said this, he seated himself beside Alcinous. Supper was
then served, and the wine was mixed for drinking. A servant led in the
favourite bard Demodocus, and set him in the midst of the company, near
one of the bearing-posts supporting the cloister, that he might lean
against it. Then Ulysses cut off a piece of roast pork with plenty of
fat (for there was abundance left on the joint) and said to a servant,
“Take this piece of pork over to Demodocus and tell him to eat it; for
all the pain his lays may cause me I will salute him none the less;
bards are honoured and respected throughout the world, for the muse
teaches them their songs and loves them.”

The servant carried the pork in his fingers over to Demodocus, who took
it and was very much pleased. They then laid their hands on the good
things that were before them, and as soon as they had had to eat and
drink, Ulysses said to Demodocus, “Demodocus, there is no one in the
world whom I admire more than I do you. You must have studied under the
Muse, Jove’s daughter, and under Apollo, so accurately do you sing the
return of the Achaeans with all their sufferings and adventures. If you
were not there yourself, you must have heard it all from some one who
was. Now, however, change your song and tell us of the wooden horse
which Epeus made with the assistance of Minerva, and which Ulysses got
by stratagem into the fort of Troy after freighting it with the men who
afterwards sacked the city. If you will sing this tale aright I will
tell all the world how magnificently heaven has endowed you.”

The bard inspired of heaven took up the story at the point where some
of the Argives set fire to their tents and sailed away while others,
hidden within the horse,73 were waiting with Ulysses in the Trojan
place of assembly. For the Trojans themselves had drawn the horse into
their fortress, and it stood there while they sat in council round it,
and were in three minds as to what they should do. Some were for
breaking it up then and there; others would have it dragged to the top
of the rock on which the fortress stood, and then thrown down the
precipice; while yet others were for letting it remain as an offering
and propitiation for the gods. And this was how they settled it in the
end, for the city was doomed when it took in that horse, within which
were all the bravest of the Argives waiting to bring death and
destruction on the Trojans. Anon he sang how the sons of the Achaeans
issued from the horse, and sacked the town, breaking out from their
ambuscade. He sang how they overran the city hither and thither and
ravaged it, and how Ulysses went raging like Mars along with Menelaus
to the house of Deiphobus. It was there that the fight raged most
furiously, nevertheless by Minerva’s help he was victorious.

All this he told, but Ulysses was overcome as he heard him, and his
cheeks were wet with tears. He wept as a woman weeps when she throws
herself on the body of her husband who has fallen before his own city
and people, fighting bravely in defence of his home and children. She
screams aloud and flings her arms about him as he lies gasping for
breath and dying, but her enemies beat her from behind about the back
and shoulders, and carry her off into slavery, to a life of labour and
sorrow, and the beauty fades from her cheeks—even so piteously did
Ulysses weep, but none of those present perceived his tears except
Alcinous, who was sitting near him, and could hear the sobs and sighs
that he was heaving. The king, therefore, at once rose and said:

“Aldermen and town councillors of the Phaeacians, let Demodocus cease
his song, for there are those present who do not seem to like it. From
the moment that we had done supper and Demodocus began to sing, our
guest has been all the time groaning and lamenting. He is evidently in
great trouble, so let the bard leave off, that we may all enjoy
ourselves, hosts and guest alike. This will be much more as it should
be, for all these festivities, with the escort and the presents that we
are making with so much good will are wholly in his honour, and any one
with even a moderate amount of right feeling knows that he ought to
treat a guest and a suppliant as though he were his own brother.

“Therefore, Sir, do you on your part affect no more concealment nor
reserve in the matter about which I shall ask you; it will be more
polite in you to give me a plain answer; tell me the name by which your
father and mother over yonder used to call you, and by which you were
known among your neighbours and fellow-citizens. There is no one,
neither rich nor poor, who is absolutely without any name whatever, for
people’s fathers and mothers give them names as soon as they are born.
Tell me also your country, nation, and city, that our ships may shape
their purpose accordingly and take you there. For the Phaeacians have
no pilots; their vessels have no rudders as those of other nations
have, but the ships themselves understand what it is that we are
thinking about and want; they know all the cities and countries in the
whole world, and can traverse the sea just as well even when it is
covered with mist and cloud, so that there is no danger of being
wrecked or coming to any harm. Still I do remember hearing my father
say that Neptune was angry with us for being too easy-going in the
matter of giving people escorts. He said that one of these days he
should wreck a ship of ours as it was returning from having escorted
some one,74 and bury our city under a high mountain. This is what my
father used to say, but whether the god will carry out his threat or no
is a matter which he will decide for himself.

“And now, tell me and tell me true. Where have you been wandering, and
in what countries have you travelled? Tell us of the peoples
themselves, and of their cities—who were hostile, savage and
uncivilised, and who, on the other hand, hospitable and humane. Tell us
also why you are made so unhappy on hearing about the return of the
Argive Danaans from Troy. The gods arranged all this, and sent them
their misfortunes in order that future generations might have something
to sing about. Did you lose some brave kinsman of your wife’s when you
were before Troy? a son-in-law or father-in-law—which are the nearest
relations a man has outside his own flesh and blood? or was it some
brave and kindly-natured comrade—for a good friend is as dear to a man
as his own brother?”




BOOK IX


ULYSSES DECLARES HIMSELF AND BEGINS HIS STORY—-THE CICONS, LOTOPHAGI,
AND CYCLOPES.


And Ulysses answered, “King Alcinous, it is a good thing to hear a bard
with such a divine voice as this man has. There is nothing better or
more delightful than when a whole people make merry together, with the
guests sitting orderly to listen, while the table is loaded with bread
and meats, and the cup-bearer draws wine and fills his cup for every
man. This is indeed as fair a sight as a man can see. Now, however,
since you are inclined to ask the story of my sorrows, and rekindle my
own sad memories in respect of them, I do not know how to begin, nor
yet how to continue and conclude my tale, for the hand of heaven has
been laid heavily upon me.

“Firstly, then, I will tell you my name that you too may know it, and
one day, if I outlive this time of sorrow, may become my guests though
I live so far away from all of you. I am Ulysses son of Laertes,
renowned among mankind for all manner of subtlety, so that my fame
ascends to heaven. I live in Ithaca, where there is a high mountain
called Neritum, covered with forests; and not far from it there is a
group of islands very near to one another—Dulichium, Same, and the
wooded island of Zacynthus. It lies squat on the horizon, all highest
up in the sea towards the sunset, while the others lie away from it
towards dawn.75 It is a rugged island, but it breeds brave men, and my
eyes know none that they better love to look upon. The goddess Calypso
kept me with her in her cave, and wanted me to marry her, as did also
the cunning Aeaean goddess Circe; but they could neither of them
persuade me, for there is nothing dearer to a man than his own country
and his parents, and however splendid a home he may have in a foreign
country, if it be far from father or mother, he does not care about it.