I can throw a dart farther than any one else can
shoot an arrow. Running is the only point in respect of which I am
afraid some of the Phaeacians might beat me, for I have been brought
down very low at sea; my provisions ran short, and therefore I am still
weak.”

They all held their peace except King Alcinous, who began, “Sir, we
have had much pleasure in hearing all that you have told us, from which
I understand that you are willing to show your prowess, as having been
displeased with some insolent remarks that have been made to you by one
of our athletes, and which could never have been uttered by any one who
knows how to talk with propriety. I hope you will apprehend my meaning,
and will explain to any one of your chief men who may be dining with
yourself and your family when you get home, that we have an hereditary
aptitude for accomplishments of all kinds. We are not particularly
remarkable for our boxing, nor yet as wrestlers, but we are singularly
fleet of foot and are excellent sailors. We are extremely fond of good
dinners, music, and dancing; we also like frequent changes of linen,
warm baths, and good beds, so now, please, some of you who are the best
dancers set about dancing, that our guest on his return home may be
able to tell his friends how much we surpass all other nations as
sailors, runners, dancers, and minstrels. Demodocus has left his lyre
at my house, so run some one or other of you and fetch it for him.”

On this a servant hurried off to bring the lyre from the king’s house,
and the nine men who had been chosen as stewards stood forward. It was
their business to manage everything connected with the sports, so they
made the ground smooth and marked a wide space for the dancers.
Presently the servant came back with Demodocus’s lyre, and he took his
place in the midst of them, whereon the best young dancers in the town
began to foot and trip it so nimbly that Ulysses was delighted with the
merry twinkling of their feet.

Meanwhile the bard began to sing the loves of Mars and Venus, and how
they first began their intrigue in the house of Vulcan. Mars made Venus
many presents, and defiled King Vulcan’s marriage bed, so the sun, who
saw what they were about, told Vulcan. Vulcan was very angry when he
heard such dreadful news, so he went to his smithy brooding mischief,
got his great anvil into its place, and began to forge some chains
which none could either unloose or break, so that they might stay there
in that place.69 When he had finished his snare he went into his
bedroom and festooned the bed-posts all over with chains like cobwebs;
he also let many hang down from the great beam of the ceiling. Not even
a god could see them so fine and subtle were they. As soon as he had
spread the chains all over the bed, he made as though he were setting
out for the fair state of Lemnos, which of all places in the world was
the one he was most fond of. But Mars kept no blind look out, and as
soon as he saw him start, hurried off to his house, burning with love
for Venus.

Now Venus was just come in from a visit to her father Jove, and was
about sitting down when Mars came inside the house, and said as he took
her hand in his own, “Let us go to the couch of Vulcan: he is not at
home, but is gone off to Lemnos among the Sintians, whose speech is
barbarous.”

She was nothing loth, so they went to the couch to take their rest,
whereon they were caught in the toils which cunning Vulcan had spread
for them, and could neither get up nor stir hand or foot, but found too
late that they were in a trap. Then Vulcan came up to them, for he had
turned back before reaching Lemnos, when his scout the sun told him
what was going on. He was in a furious passion, and stood in the
vestibule making a dreadful noise as he shouted to all the gods.

“Father Jove,” he cried, “and all you other blessed gods who live for
ever, come here and see the ridiculous and disgraceful sight that I
will show you. Jove’s daughter Venus is always dishonouring me because
I am lame. She is in love with Mars, who is handsome and clean built,
whereas I am a cripple—but my parents are to blame for that, not I;
they ought never to have begotten me. Come and see the pair together
asleep on my bed. It makes me furious to look at them. They are very
fond of one another, but I do not think they will lie there longer than
they can help, nor do I think that they will sleep much; there,
however, they shall stay till her father has repaid me the sum I gave
him for his baggage of a daughter, who is fair but not honest.”

On this the gods gathered to the house of Vulcan. Earth-encircling
Neptune came, and Mercury the bringer of luck, and King Apollo, but the
goddesses staid at home all of them for shame. Then the givers of all
good things stood in the doorway, and the blessed gods roared with
inextinguishable laughter, as they saw how cunning Vulcan had been,
whereon one would turn towards his neighbour saying:

“Ill deeds do not prosper, and the weak confound the strong. See how
limping Vulcan, lame as he is, has caught Mars who is the fleetest god
in heaven; and now Mars will be cast in heavy damages.”

Thus did they converse, but King Apollo said to Mercury, “Messenger
Mercury, giver of good things, you would not care how strong the chains
were, would you, if you could sleep with Venus?”

“King Apollo,” answered Mercury, “I only wish I might get the chance,
though there were three times as many chains—and you might look on, all
of you, gods and goddesses, but I would sleep with her if I could.”

The immortal gods burst out laughing as they heard him, but Neptune
took it all seriously, and kept on imploring Vulcan to set Mars free
again. “Let him go,” he cried, “and I will undertake, as you require,
that he shall pay you all the damages that are held reasonable among
the immortal gods.”

“Do not,” replied Vulcan, “ask me to do this; a bad man’s bond is bad
security; what remedy could I enforce against you if Mars should go
away and leave his debts behind him along with his chains?”

“Vulcan,” said Neptune, “if Mars goes away without paying his damages,
I will pay you myself.” So Vulcan answered, “In this case I cannot and
must not refuse you.”

Thereon he loosed the bonds that bound them, and as soon as they were
free they scampered off, Mars to Thrace and laughter-loving Venus to
Cyprus and to Paphos, where is her grove and her altar fragrant with
burnt offerings. Here the Graces bathed her, and anointed her with oil
of ambrosia such as the immortal gods make use of, and they clothed her
in raiment of the most enchanting beauty.

Thus sang the bard, and both Ulysses and the seafaring Phaeacians were
charmed as they heard him.

Then Alcinous told Laodamas and Halius to dance alone, for there was no
one to compete with them. So they took a red ball which Polybus had
made for them, and one of them bent himself backwards and threw it up
towards the clouds, while the other jumped from off the ground and
caught it with ease before it came down again. When they had done
throwing the ball straight up into the air they began to dance, and at
the same time kept on throwing it backwards and forwards to one
another, while all the young men in the ring applauded and made a great
stamping with their feet. Then Ulysses said:

“King Alcinous, you said your people were the nimblest dancers in the
world, and indeed they have proved themselves to be so. I was
astonished as I saw them.”

The king was delighted at this, and exclaimed to the Phaeacians,
“Aldermen and town councillors, our guest seems to be a person of
singular judgement; let us give him such proof of our hospitality as he
may reasonably expect. There are twelve chief men among you, and
counting myself there are thirteen; contribute, each of you, a clean
cloak, a shirt, and a talent of fine gold; let us give him all this in
a lump down at once, so that when he gets his supper he may do so with
a light heart. As for Euryalus he will have to make a formal apology
and a present too, for he has been rude.”

Thus did he speak. The others all of them applauded his saying, and
sent their servants to fetch the presents. Then Euryalus said, “King
Alcinous, I will give the stranger all the satisfaction you require. He
shall have my sword, which is of bronze, all but the hilt, which is of
silver. I will also give him the scabbard of newly sawn ivory into
which it fits. It will be worth a great deal to him.”

As he spoke he placed the sword in the hands of Ulysses and said, “Good
luck to you, father stranger; if anything has been said amiss may the
winds blow it away with them, and may heaven grant you a safe return,
for I understand you have been long away from home, and have gone
through much hardship.”

To which Ulysses answered, “Good luck to you too my friend, and may the
gods grant you every happiness. I hope you will not miss the sword you
have given me along with your apology.”

With these words he girded the sword about his shoulders and towards
sundown the presents began to make their appearance, as the servants of
the donors kept bringing them to the house of King Alcinous; here his
sons received them, and placed them under their mother’s charge. Then
Alcinous led the way to the house and bade his guests take their seats.

“Wife,” said he, turning to Queen Arete, “Go, fetch the best chest we
have, and put a clean cloak and shirt in it. Also, set a copper on the
fire and heat some water; our guest will take a warm bath; see also to
the careful packing of the presents that the noble Phaeacians have made
him; he will thus better enjoy both his supper and the singing that
will follow. I shall myself give him this golden goblet—which is of
exquisite workmanship—that he may be reminded of me for the rest of his
life whenever he makes a drink offering to Jove, or to any of the
gods.