Then they began to fight, and Irus hit Ulysses on the right
shoulder; but Ulysses gave Irus a blow on the neck under the ear that
broke in the bones of his skull, and the blood came gushing out of his
mouth; he fell groaning in the dust, gnashing his teeth and kicking on
the ground, but the suitors threw up their hands and nearly died of
laughter, as Ulysses caught hold of him by the foot and dragged him
into the outer court as far as the gate-house. There he propped him up
against the wall and put his staff in his hands. “Sit here,” said he,
“and keep the dogs and pigs off; you are a pitiful creature, and if you
try to make yourself king of the beggars any more you shall fare still
worse.”

Then he threw his dirty old wallet, all tattered and torn over his
shoulder with the cord by which it hung, and went back to sit down upon
the threshold; but the suitors went within the cloisters, laughing and
saluting him, “May Jove, and all the other gods,” said they, “grant you
whatever you want for having put an end to the importunity of this
insatiable tramp. We will take him over to the mainland presently, to
king Echetus, who kills every one that comes near him.”

Ulysses hailed this as of good omen, and Antinous set a great goat’s
paunch before him filled with blood and fat. Amphinomus took two loaves
out of the bread-basket and brought them to him, pledging him as he did
so in a golden goblet of wine. “Good luck to you,” he said, “father
stranger, you are very badly off at present, but I hope you will have
better times by and by.”

To this Ulysses answered, “Amphinomus, you seem to be a man of good
understanding, as indeed you may well be, seeing whose son you are. I
have heard your father well spoken of; he is Nisus of Dulichium, a man
both brave and wealthy. They tell me you are his son, and you appear to
be a considerable person; listen, therefore, and take heed to what I am
saying. Man is the vainest of all creatures that have their being upon
earth. As long as heaven vouchsafes him health and strength, he thinks
that he shall come to no harm hereafter, and even when the blessed gods
bring sorrow upon him, he bears it as he needs must, and makes the best
of it; for God almighty gives men their daily minds day by day. I know
all about it, for I was a rich man once, and did much wrong in the
stubbornness of my pride, and in the confidence that my father and my
brothers would support me; therefore let a man fear God in all things
always, and take the good that heaven may see fit to send him without
vain glory. Consider the infamy of what these suitors are doing; see
how they are wasting the estate, and doing dishonour to the wife, of
one who is certain to return some day, and that, too, not long hence.
Nay, he will be here soon; may heaven send you home quietly first that
you may not meet with him in the day of his coming, for once he is here
the suitors and he will not part bloodlessly.”

With these words he made a drink-offering, and when he had drunk he put
the gold cup again into the hands of Amphinomus, who walked away
serious and bowing his head, for he foreboded evil. But even so he did
not escape destruction, for Minerva had doomed him to fall by the hand
of Telemachus. So he took his seat again at the place from which he had
come.

Then Minerva put it into the mind of Penelope to show herself to the
suitors, that she might make them still more enamoured of her, and win
still further honour from her son and husband. So she feigned a mocking
laugh and said, “Eurynome, I have changed my mind, and have a fancy to
show myself to the suitors although I detest them. I should like also
to give my son a hint that he had better not have anything more to do
with them. They speak fairly enough but they mean mischief.”

“My dear child,” answered Eurynome, “all that you have said is true, go
and tell your son about it, but first wash yourself and anoint your
face. Do not go about with your cheeks all covered with tears; it is
not right that you should grieve so incessantly; for Telemachus, whom
you always prayed that you might live to see with a beard, is already
grown up.”

“I know, Eurynome,” replied Penelope, “that you mean well, but do not
try and persuade me to wash and to anoint myself, for heaven robbed me
of all my beauty on the day my husband sailed; nevertheless, tell
Autonoe and Hippodamia that I want them. They must be with me when I am
in the cloister; I am not going among the men alone; it would not be
proper for me to do so.”

On this the old woman150 went out of the room to bid the maids go to
their mistress. In the meantime Minerva bethought her of another
matter, and sent Penelope off into a sweet slumber; so she lay down on
her couch and her limbs became heavy with sleep. Then the goddess shed
grace and beauty over her that all the Achaeans might admire her. She
washed her face with the ambrosial loveliness that Venus wears when she
goes dancing with the Graces; she made her taller and of a more
commanding figure, while as for her complexion it was whiter than sawn
ivory. When Minerva had done all this she went away, whereon the maids
came in from the women’s room and woke Penelope with the sound of their
talking.

“What an exquisitely delicious sleep I have been having,” said she, as
she passed her hands over her face, “in spite of all my misery. I wish
Diana would let me die so sweetly now at this very moment, that I might
no longer waste in despair for the loss of my dear husband, who
possessed every kind of good quality and was the most distinguished man
among the Achaeans.”

With these words she came down from her upper room, not alone but
attended by two of her maidens, and when she reached the suitors she
stood by one of the bearing-posts supporting the roof of the cloister,
holding a veil before her face, and with a staid maid servant on either
side of her. As they beheld her the suitors were so overpowered and
became so desperately enamoured of her, that each one prayed he might
win her for his own bed fellow.

“Telemachus,” said she, addressing her son, “I fear you are no longer
so discreet and well conducted as you used to be. When you were younger
you had a greater sense of propriety; now, however, that you are grown
up, though a stranger to look at you would take you for the son of a
well to do father as far as size and good looks go, your conduct is by
no means what it should be. What is all this disturbance that has been
going on, and how came you to allow a stranger to be so disgracefully
ill-treated? What would have happened if he had suffered serious injury
while a suppliant in our house? Surely this would have been very
discreditable to you.”

“I am not surprised, my dear mother, at your displeasure,” replied
Telemachus, “I understand all about it and know when things are not as
they should be, which I could not do when I was younger; I cannot,
however, behave with perfect propriety at all times. First one and then
another of these wicked people here keeps driving me out of my mind,
and I have no one to stand by me. After all, however, this fight
between Irus and the stranger did not turn out as the suitors meant it
to do, for the stranger got the best of it. I wish Father Jove,
Minerva, and Apollo would break the neck of every one of these wooers
of yours, some inside the house and some out; and I wish they might all
be as limp as Irus is over yonder in the gate of the outer court. See
how he nods his head like a drunken man; he has had such a thrashing
that he cannot stand on his feet nor get back to his home, wherever
that may be, for he has no strength left in him.”

Thus did they converse. Eurymachus then came up and said, “Queen
Penelope, daughter of Icarius, if all the Achaeans in Iasian Argos
could see you at this moment, you would have still more suitors in your
house by tomorrow morning, for you are the most admirable woman in the
whole world both as regards personal beauty and strength of
understanding.”

To this Penelope replied, “Eurymachus, heaven robbed me of all my
beauty whether of face or figure when the Argives set sail for Troy and
my dear husband with them. If he were to return and look after my
affairs, I should both be more respected and show a better presence to
the world. As it is, I am oppressed with care, and with the afflictions
which heaven has seen fit to heap upon me. My husband foresaw it all,
and when he was leaving home he took my right wrist in his hand—‘Wife,’
he said, ‘we shall not all of us come safe home from Troy, for the
Trojans fight well both with bow and spear. They are excellent also at
fighting from chariots, and nothing decides the issue of a fight sooner
than this. I know not, therefore, whether heaven will send me back to
you, or whether I may not fall over there at Troy. In the meantime do
you look after things here. Take care of my father and mother as at
present, and even more so during my absence, but when you see our son
growing a beard, then marry whom you will, and leave this your present
home.’ This is what he said and now it is all coming true. A night will
come when I shall have to yield myself to a marriage which I detest,
for Jove has taken from me all hope of happiness. This further grief,
moreover, cuts me to the very heart. You suitors are not wooing me
after the custom of my country. When men are courting a woman who they
think will be a good wife to them and who is of noble birth, and when
they are each trying to win her for himself, they usually bring oxen
and sheep to feast the friends of the lady, and they make her
magnificent presents, instead of eating up other people’s property
without paying for it.”

This was what she said, and Ulysses was glad when he heard her trying
to get presents out of the suitors, and flattering them with fair words
which he knew she did not mean.